SUPPLEMENTAL
COMMUNICATIONS AND
REPORTS 3.

BERKELEY CITY COUNCIL
REGULAR MEETING

DATE OF MEETING: TUESDAY, JULY 11, 2023
TIME: 6:00 P.M.

The agenda packet for this meeting was distributed/posted on June 29, 2023. Communications in this
supplement were received after 12pm on July 10, 2023. This communication packet was distributed/posted
on July 13, 2023.

Consent Calendar

Each item in this supplement follows the corresponding item on the City Council Agenda
for this date.

Item #7: Contract: Insight Housing (formerly Berkeley Food and Housing Project)
to operate interim housing at the Super 8
166. Steve Lipson

Item #28: Relinquishment of Council Office Budget Funds and Co-Sponsorship of
the Cesar Chavez Dolores Huerta Tribute Site Curriculum Project
167. Beatriz Leyva-Cutler and Santiago Casal —

item #29: Resolution Opposing Tokyo Electric Power Company and the
Government of Japan’s Planned Discharge of Wastewater from Fukushima
Daiichi Nuclear Power Plant into the Pacific Ocean

168. Tsukuru Fors

169. Phoebe Thomas Sorgen

170. David McGuire

171. Torrance Carroll

172. Bindu Desai

173. Eva Frye

174. Yuka Saito

175. Laura Feldman

176. Linda Roman

177. Liz Taylor

----
178. Jacqueline Cabasso, on behalf of Western States Legal Foundation
179. Eri Tomita

180. Heiko Hasegawa

181. Desiree McGill

Action Calendar — New Business

Item #30: Zoning Ordinance Amendments to Title 23 of the Berkeley municipal
Code to Conform to State Law, and Make Non-Substantive Technical Edits
182. Presentation, submitted by Planning and Development

Action Calendar — New Business

Item #31: Staff Shortages: City Services Constrained by Staff Retention Challenges
and Delayed Hiring

183. Presentation, submitted by the Auditor

184. Presentation, submitted by the City Manager

Item #32: Referral Response: Affordable Housing Preference Policy for Rental
Housing Created Through the Below Market Rate and Housing Trust Fund Programs
185. Derethia DuVal

Item #33: Adoption — Civic Center Phase II — Design Concept
186. Linda Currie
187. Beth Lamont
188. Diane Ross-Leech
189. Kelly Hammargren
190. Tom Kelly .
191. Kathleen Giustino : oy
192. Erin Diehm
193. Andra Mitchell
194. Jack Kurzweil

Action Calendar

Item #35: De-Prioritizing the enforcement of laws imposing criminal penalties for
Entheogenic/Psychedelic plants and fungi for personal use
195. IsabelleGaston ©

Miscellaneous Communications
196. Mr. Eid

----
166

Benado, Tony . .
Ceeen ee eee ee TT ccc ACCC CCT ata

From: ) Steven Lipson <stevenlipson634@gmail.com>
Sent: -Tuesday, July 11, 2023 6:23 PM

To: All Council

Subject: Rental of Super 8 Motel

WARNING: This is not a City of Berkeley email. Do not click links or attachments unless you trust the sender and know the content is
safe.

Dear Councilperson, »

How much is the city actually budgeting for this move? Does our cost stop at the $1,000,000 for rental? How
much are we budgeting for repairs during and after the rental? My guess is that our total housing cost, not
including social services, will be at least $75,000/room per year. Is this the best, most efficient use of city
funds? .

Or is the proposal to just rent the Super 8 and not budget all the costs other than the direct rental?
. Please spend our revenue wisely.

Thanks and best regards,

Steve Lipson |

634 Woodmont Avenue \

Berkeley:
(510) 280-5334

----
167

Benado, Tony | _ |
Eee

From: Beatriz Leyva-Cutler <beatrizleyvac@gmail.com>

Sent: Tuesday, July 11, 2023 2:52 PM

To: All Council; Berkeley Mayor's Office; Santiago Casal

Ce: LatinosUnidos de Berkeley

Subject: ~ Item 23 and 28 Tonight's Meeting

Attachments: 2023-07-11 Item 28 Relinquishment of Council Office-1.pdf; 2023-07- " Item 23

Relinquishment of Council Office.pdf

WARNING: This is not a City of Berkeley email. Do not click links or attachments unless you trust the sender and know the content is
safe. .

Dear Mayor Arreguin and City Councilmembers, in advance
Santiago Casal and I want to thank you for your ongoing support in
recognizing the Cesar Chavez and Dolores Huerta Tribute Site via
the resolutions before you tonight.

We would like to thank in advance the city council members that
have already agreed to contribute via their discretionary funds:
Harrison, Rigel, Taplin and the Mayor and would like to encourage
100% support of the city council in this legacy resolution and
contribution to this important legacy project. Your endorsement for
the work of Cesar Chavez and Dolores Huerta and the site that will
live on beyond any of us. This tribute site will bring people to
Berkeley; and also be a special place for those here in Berkeley
especially our students.

Gracias, Santiago and I look forward to thanking you via tonight's
Zoom meeting.

Beatriz Leyva-Cutler and Santiago Casal

----
Page 1 of 3

28

/ CITY OF

Councilmember, District 4

CONSENT CALENDAR
| July 11, 2023
TO: Honorable Members of the City Council
FROM: Councilmember Harrison, Mayor Arreguin, and Councilmember Hahn

SUBJECT:  Relinquishment of Council Office Budget Funds and Co-Sponsorship of
the César Chavez Dolores Huerta Tribute Site Curriculum Project

RECOMMENDATION

Adopt a resolution approving an expenditure of D13 funds and cosponsorship of the
César Chavez/Dolores Huerta Tribute Site Curriculum Project, with $250 relinquished to
the City’s general fund for this purpose each from Mayor Arreguin’s and Councilmember
Harrison’s discretionary Council Office Budget Funds, and from any other
Councilmembers who would like to contribute.

BACKGROUND

The current statewide curricula that covers the life and work of labor and environmental
organizers, César Chavez and Dolores Huerta, does not adequately cover their rich
legacies nor their direct impact on Berkeley. However, new lesson plans developed as
part of the “Cesar Chavez Dolores Huerta Tribute Site Curriculum Project” will include
both in-class and experiential learning at the tribute site on the waterfront at Berkeley’s
César Chavez Park. The founders of the curriculum project, Santiago Casal and Beatriz
Levya-Cutler, aim to “...honor the equitable relationship, work and words of César and
Dolores and others in the farmworker struggle. The synergy of their partnership is what
made them highly effective.”

Casal and Levya-Cutler plan to apply for the Berkeley Public Schools Fund grant,
LEARNING for Equity, which provides $1,000 - $15,000 grants to projects focused on
addressing systemic oppression through strategic, justice-oriented programming. This
funding would allow complete curriculum implementation across Berkeley schools by
Spring 2024. The funds provided by Council discretionary budgets, will help provide
supplemental compensation for teacher leaders who will utilize summer 2023 to develop
prototypes and recruit grade-level teacher consultants. It is in the public interest to
donate to this project which serves the fundamental. municipal purpose of education.

FISCAL IMPACTS OF RECOMMENDATION
No General Fund impact. $250 is available from Mayor Arreguin and Councilmember
Harrison’s office accounts.

2180 Milvia Street, Berkeley, CA 94704 e Tel: (510) 981-7140 e TDD: (510) 981-6903 e Fax: (510) 644-1174
E-Mail: KHarrison@cityofberkeley. info

----
Page 2 of 3

Relinquishment of Council Office Budget Funds and Co-Sponsorship of the Cesar
Chavez Dolores Huerta Tribute Site Curriculum Project

ENVIRONMENTAL SUSTAINABILITY
Not applicable.

. CONTACT PERSON ~
Councilmember Kate Harrison, (510) 981-7140
Mayor Jesse Arreguin, (510) 981-7100

ATTACHMENTS
.1.Resolution Granting Office Funds for a Municipal Purpose

CONSENT CALENDAR ©
July 11, 2023

----
Page 3 of 3

RESOLUTION NO. #4#,####-N.S.

CITY SPONSORSHIP OF THE CESAR CHAVEZ DOLORES HUERTA
TRIBUTE SITE CURRICULUM FOR BERKELEY STUDENTS

WHEREAS, César Chavez and Dolores Huerta were civil and human rights activists, labor
leaders, and environmental justice organizers who dedicated their lives to the earth, to
agriculture, and to the farmworkers; and

WHEREAS, the synergy of their partnership and combined legacy uplifts workers across
the world; and

WHEREAS, the City of Berkeley re-named Berkeley’s Waterfront Park as César Chavez
Park in 1996 and the City of Berkeley supported the creation of a solar calendar at the
Park as a tribute to these two social and environmental justice warriors; and

WHEREAS, Dolores Huerta is, to this day, a long- standing community advocate and
promotes the educational importance of land stewardship; and

WHEREAS, the Chavez/Huerta curriculum will expose students in Berkeley’s public
schools to the importance of service to the community and to four virtues located in the
four directions of the Chavez/Huerta Tribute Site: Hope (East), Determination (South),
Courage (West), and Tolerance/Non-Violence (North); and

WHEREAS, the children and students of Berkeley now more than ever need and want to
inherit a planet that is safe and sustainable.

NOW THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED by the Council of the City of Berkeley that funds
relinquished by Mayor Arreguin and Councilmember Harrison from their Office budgets of
up to $250 each and from their office budgets of an amount to be determined by other
Councilmembers, shall be granted to the Chavez/Huerta Tribute Site Curriculum Project to
serve a municipal public purpose.

----
Page 1 of 3

CONSENT CALENDAR
July 11, 2023

To: Members of the City Council
From: Mayor Jesse Arreguin and Councilmember Sophie Hahn

-Subject: Relinquishment of Council Office Budget Funds for Chavez/Huerta Tribute Site

RECOMMENDATION .

Adopt a Resolution approving the expenditure of up to $5,000 from Mayor Arreguin, and
any other Councilmembers, to the Kala Art Institute, the fiscal sponsor for the
Chavez/Huerta Tribute Site, with funds relinquished from the City’s General Fund for the
purpose of hiring of grounds keepers and providing the resources needed for the
maintenance of the Chavez/Huerta Tribute Site, from the discretionary Council Office
Budgets of Mayor Arreguin and any other Councilmembers who would like to contribute.

BACKGROUND

The Chavez/Huerta Tribute Site’, located at Cesar Chavez Park along Spinnaker Way,
is centered around a lush green space overlooking the Bay Area. Instead of a single
statue or monument for the farmworker and labor organizer by which the park is named
after, the site has intentionally developed a comprehensive urban solar/lunar calendar,
along with a quartet of stones engraved with four virtues of the Farmworkers Movement:
Determination, Courage, Hope, and Tolerance. The site draws from design concepts in
art, astronomy, and architecture found at ancient and indigenous sky observatory sites
from around the world. The site seeks to promote an understanding of the Rhythm of

- the Seasons, the work, life, and values of Cesar E. Chavez and Dolores Huerta, provide
an outdoor classroom to study science, math, and culture, and create a space for
reflection and peace along the Berkeley shoreline. The site also contains a virtual tour,
which can be activated using your mobile device, and a physical, self-explanatory sign
to assist visitors with utilizing the solar calendar and position of stones to understand its
relationship to solstice and equinox.

A sum of $5,000 is being sought by the caretakers of the Chavez/Huerta Tribute Site to
go towards fees associated with employing gardeners, hauling soil, conducting stone
replacement, composting goods, grounds maintenance, upgrading signage, and paying
the Kala Art Institute a fiscal agent fee.

‘ httos://chavezpark.org/cesar-chavez-memorial-solar-calendar/

2180 Milvia Street, Berkeley, CA 94704 e Tel: (510) 981-7100e TDD: (510) 981-6903 e Fax: (510) 981-7199
E-Mail: mayor@berkeleyca.gov

----
Page 2 of 3

Relinquishment of Council Office Budget Funds for Chavez/Huerta Tribute Site CONSENT CALENDAR

July 11, 2023
We are proposing that City Councilmembers make individual grants of up to $1,000 to
the Kala Art Institute to help with the upkeep of the Chavez Huerta Tribute site, with
work in the next fiscal year to begin in October 2023.

FINANCIAL IMPLICATIONS
No General Fund impact; up to $5,000 available from Mayor Arreguin’s Office Budget
discretionary accounts.

ENVIRONMENTAL SUSTAINABILITY AND CLIMATE IMPACTS.
There are no environmental impacts associated with the recommendations in this
report.

CONTACT PERSON
Mayor Jesse Arreguin, 510-981-7100:
Anthony Rodriguez, Senior Legislative Assistant

Attachments:
1: Resolution for Council Expenditures

Page 2

----
Page 3 of 3 ,

Relinquishment of Council Office Budget Funds for Chavez/Huerta Tribute Site CONSENT CALENDAR
July 11, 2023

RESOLUTION NO. 7H AAEN.S.

AUTHORIZING THE EXPENDUTURE OF SURPLUS FUNDS FROM THE OFFICE
EXPENSE ACCOUNTS OF THE MAYOR AND COUNCILMEMBERS FOR FUNDING
TOWARDS THE MAINTENANCE OF THE CHAVEZ/HUERTA TRIBUTE SITE, A
PUBLIC SERVICE FOR A MUNICIPAL PUBLIC PURPOSE

WHEREAS, Mayor Arreguin has surplus funds in his office expenditure account; and

WHEREAS, a California non-profit tax-exempt corporation, the Kala Art Institute, seeks
funds in the amount of $5,000 to provide maintenance and upkeep for the Chavez/Huerta
Tribute Site located at the Cesar Chavez Park along Spinnaker Way; and

WHEREAS, the provision of such services would fulfill the following municipal public
purpose of bringing communities across the City, including but not limited to.Latine,
immigrant, astronomy lovers, historians, youth, and civic communities, together to honor
the virtues and contribution of Cesar Chavez, Dolores Huerta, and others involved in the
Farmworkers Movement.

NOW THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED by the Council of the City of Berkeley that
funds relinquished by the Mayor and Councilmembers from their Council Office Budget
of up to $5,000 per office shall be granted to the Kala Art Institute to.fund the following
services bringing communities across the City, including, but not limited to, Latine,
immigrant, astronomy lovers, historians, youth, and civic communities, together to honor
the virtues and contribution of Cesar Chavez, Dolores Huerta, and others involved in the
Farmworkers Movement.

Page 3


----
168

Benado, Tony | \
a nnn TT ee

From: Tsukuru Fors <forfuturefukushima@gmail.com>

Sent: . Monday, July 10, 2023 12:41 PM |

To: - All Council

Subject: In support of the Resolution (Consent Item #29) Opposing Tokyo Electric Power

Company and the Government of Japan's Planned Discharge of Wastewater from
‘Fukushima Daiichi Nuclear Power Plant into the Pacific Ocean

WARNING: This is not a City of Berkeley email. Do not click links or attachments unless you trust the sender and know the content is
safe.

My name is Tsukuru Fors. | am an anti-nuclear/human rights activist based in Los Angeles, California. | grew
up in Hiroshima, Japan, and am a graduate of a high school where 350 young lives were brutally taken on
August 6, 1945. Spending my formative years surrounded by people who were directly affected by the
intergenerational traumas of the atrocity has prompted me to advocate for all victims of nuclear disasters
globally in the past and present.

| have been made aware of the recent efforts to discredit a resolution championed by councilmember Kate
Harrison to oppose TEPCO/the government of Japan’s plan of dumping radioactive wastewater from the
crippled Fukushima Daiichi Nuclear Power Plant. In the letter that was addressed to city council members to
discourage them from voting yes on the resolution, the recent approval issued by the IAEA (International
Atomic Energy Agency) was cited. | felt the need to respond to that. ,

| am not going to debate the validity of the IAEA report/approval here. Rather, once again | would like to cite
the findings published by a board of five experts commissioned by the Pacific Islands Forum. The findings
point out that TEPCO has neither done enough due- “diligence nor yr provided enough data to ascertain the safety
of the proposed plan.

Among the critical failings with TEPCO's “safety” claim, two things stand out to me. One is their lack of analysis
with regards to the transboundary issues. Wastewater released by Japan is not going to stay in and around
Japan; therefore, the concerns of neighboring nations such as South Korea, the Philippines, China, and the
Pacific Island nations should be seriously considered in the decision-making process. Moreover, the potential —
risks are not limited to the Asia-Pacific region. A 2012 study found evidence that bluefin tuna had transported
radionuclides from Fukushima across the Pacific to California.

The other is the matter of bioaccumulation and bioconcentration. Radionuclides such as Tritium and Strontium
90 can pass various levels of the food chain and be “bio-accumulated.” The higher up the food chain, the
higher the level of the contamination. In fish like Cod that are relatively high up in the food chain, the
concentration can be 2,000-6,000 times higher than the level naturally found in the water. TEPCO’s claim does
not take into consideration the potential impact of OBT (Organically Bound Tritium) on a human body, either:
once it enters the body, OBT can replace water in soft tissues, causing damage to DNA and cell mutations.
Because of these failings, experts like Robert H. Richmond, director of the Kewalo Marine Laboratory at the
University of Hawaii at Manoa and who is among the board of experts commissioned by the Pacific Islands
Forum, are calling the plan “ill-advised” and premature.

Lastly, | would like to appeal to the moral and ethical responsibility that we have, as citizens of the United
States, to the people of the Pacific Island nations and future generations worldwide. The question that | want
us to ask ourselves is this: should we be treating the oceans as a dumping ground? Haven't the world’s oceans
been polluted and stressed enough? The people of the Pacific Island nations have been victimized for decades
by the nuclear ambitions of more “powerful” nations. For Japan to release wastewater from the damaged

f

----
Fukushima Daiichi Nuclear Power Plant is a gross disregard for their livelihood and ocean way of life. For us,
citizens of the United States, not to oppose such’a plan is to be complicit in the act of nuclear colonialism.

| was born and raised in Japan but immigrated to the United States of America. | have raised my child here and
enjoyed the beaches and the ocean as a resident of California. It is my obligation to do everything in my power
to protect the environment and leave it as clean as possible for future generations. | am pleading to you,
honorable members of the Berkeley City Council, to act on your conscience and to do your part in being good
stewards of our planet.

Sincerely,

Tsukuru Fors

References:

Over 70 percent of Fukushima Waste Water Fails Discharge Limits and Needs More Treatment, Says China's
Nuclear Watchdog | ,

https:/Awww.scm com/news/china/science/article/3226667/over-70-cent-fukushima-waste-water-fails-

discharge-limits-and-needs-more-treatment-says-chinas ?fbclid=lwAR3u SqwpBdGgGB-
DN8Pm10YYVOd6BVgS0OMm _IsS5oc30nEFG3Qx9Z5q5GbU ;

[AEA rubber-stamped release of radioactive Fukushima water without finishing sample analysis

https://english.hani.co.kr/arti/english_edition/e international/1099039.htmI?fbclid=lwAR3hGihH-
MmD4wO48ceMW-oiX6lGuQgS 1Fa2PULKQ7ify7 kxKx8J28SUhM

Statement: Pacific Islands Forum Secretary General Henry Puna on the Fukushima Treated Waste Water

httos:/Awww.forumsec. org/2023/06/26/statement-pacific-islands-forum-secretary-general-henry- una-on-the-

fukushima-treated-nuclear-wastewater/?fbclid=lwAR2ptXiL-
kafTGI7l45n56BukfWiox4xAT/3tBRvctviznLgoQUifPMpFUo


----
169

Benado, Tony . so
TTT EE

From: ~ Phoebe Thomas Sorgen <phoebeso@earthlink.net>
Sent: - Monday, July 10, 2023 1:01 PM
To: All Council; Berkeley Mayor's Office; City Clerk
Cc: Kesarwani, Rashi; Taplin, Terry; Bartlett, Ben; Harrison, Kate; Hahn, Sophie; Wengraf,
. Susan, Robinson, Rigel; Humbert, Mark
Subject: adopt Res to stop tons of Fukushima radioactive H20 into ocean Tue by Consent please
Importance: High

WARNING: This is not a City of Berkeley email. Do not click links or attachments unless you trust the sender and know the content is
safe.
Dear Mayor Arreguin and members of the Berkeley City Council:

We urge you to adopt the Resolution on consent tomorrow night towards stopping the dangerous release of 1.3 |
million tons (and counting) of radioactive water from Fukushima into the Pacific. The dangers are proven by hard |
science, but you need not read the peer-reviewed studies and the pleas from the Pacific Island Forum's
independent, international team of scientists, from the government of Korea, etc. It is common sense that releasing
that huge amount of nuclear waste water into the ocean, on top of other releases, cannot be in the interest of public —
health or the Pacific flora/fauna. Keeping it on site is best, and using it to make concrete as recommended by the
interdisciplinary experts mentioned above.

As you know, the nuclear industry is extremely powerful and hires skilled marketing professionals, as well as funding
biased “think tanks”, to maximize profits. Do not be confused by the Breakthrough Institute’s profit-driven

_ misstatements of fact. Even the [AEA has been bought out, with promoting nuclear energy being the major part of
its mission.

If you have any reservations, about passing the Resolution by consent, please be sure to read this:
https://streaklinks.com/BkvpGgU3975kGGiwLgvHe0SZ/https%3A%2F%2Fdocs.google. com%2Fdocument%2Fd%2F1eRei

RibUupdDsBdRZmgkLq9ZobWfLv-Cz4K4hzrl4x4%2Fedit

The Nuclear Free Berkeley Act was adopted by a huge majority of voters. We’re still proud of this heritage of defending
Life on Earth. The risk hasn’t lessened, quite the contrary. May Berkeley’: s common sense pro-peace and pro-life
traditions continue!

Sincerely,
Phoebe Anne Thomas Sorgen (she/they), co-founder Fukushima Response Bay Area

The beautiful land | am grateful to inhabit was the territory of xuéyun (Huchiun [Hooch-yoon]), ancestral and
unceded land of the Chochenyo [Cho-chen-yo]-speaking Ohlone [Oh-low-nee] people, ancestors and descendants
of the sovereign Verona Band of Alameda County. This land is of great importance to Ohlone people. We who care
may pay a tax deductible Shuumi Land

Tax:

_https://sogoreate-landtrust.org/donate-update-
draft/ .

| honor the original inhabitants, the documented 5,000-year history of a
vibrant community at the West Berkeley Shellmound, the Ohlone people who reside here and beyond, and
all ancestors and descendants of slavery and attempted genocide. Colonists’ descendants still benefit from the
occupation of stolen lands and other exploitation. The U.S.’s tragic history is heart-breaking and shameful.
Rematriation and extensive reparations are long overdue.

----
170

Benado, Tony
mmm mia

From: David McGuire <sharkfilms@gmail.com> ; OS |

Sent: Monday, July 10, 2023 5:20 PM . |
' To: Harrison, Kate; All Council; Berkeley Mayor's Office; City Clerk |

Cc: : Contact@berkeleybeacon.com; Dana Ngo

Subject: | SUPPORT Resolution Opposing Tokyo Electric Power Company and the Government of

Japan's Planned Discharge of Wastewater from Fukushima Daiichi Nuclear Power Plant
into the Pacific Ocean.

WARNING: This is not a city of Berkeley email. Do not click links or attachments unless you trust the sender and know the content is
safe.
Dear Councilwoman Harrison, Mr. Mayor.and Berkeley City Council,

As a Berkeley resident and director of an ocean health non profit- Shark Stewards a project of The Earth Island Institute,
we support your resolution to oppose the Tokyo Electric Power Company proposal to release contaminated wastewater |
form Fukushima. ;

Despite opposition of The Pacific.lsland Forum scientists, Japanese citizens and neighboring governments, the Tokyo
Electric Power Company (TEPCO) intends to move ahead in discharging thousands of tons of radioactive wastewater into |
the ocean in coming weeks.

Along with other citizens and non protits ss we are sharing our voice on behalf of the ocean and ocean health eppeenip this
release.

In care and protection of our ocean, South Korea, other Pacific Islands nations, hundreds of institutions, global NGOs, and
thousands of fishers have ail risen to the responsibility of creating educational awareness, alternative solutions, and
political resolutions to this pivotal decision, as this precedent-setting event approaches over the horizon.

We encourage you to reject the letter sent by industry advocate Breakthru Institute with their specious argument lumping
ocean non profits as No Nuke groups, and obfuscating risk of exposure.

We are representing public and environmental health interests, and Tesco’s “dilution and dumping solution” instead of
available treatment technologies.

Although currents may take 3 or more years to reach us, migratory marine megafauna such as bluefin tuna take less than
a year.

Untreated Beta emitting molecules such as tritium pose an internal exposure risk to vertebrates, and potentially impact
more than human health, but also coral reefs and Pacific marine life.

Breakthru’s statement that "The risk to Berkeley “residents and businesses’ is, quite literally, zero," is in direct conflict

with the City of Berkeley's global championship of the rights of people and the environment. By adopting the proposed
resolution, the California Berkeley City Council can demonstrate its unwavering commitment to environmental stewardship —
and justice and send a. powerful message to decision-makers at all levels.

Thank you for your attention to this pressing matter. | trust that you will consider the scientific evidence, environmental

implications, and the concerns of the global community when casting your vote.
Please feel free to contact me if there is any additional information or support | can provide.

David McGuire, MPH
Director, Shark Stewards

Shark Stewards is a project of The Earth Island Institute

----
! 471

\

Benado, Tony

From: _ Torrance Carroll <torrancecarroll@gmail.com>

Sent: Monday, July 10, 2023 4:48 PM

To: All Council; City Clerk; Berkeley Mayor's Office; Taplin, Terry; Bartlett, Ben; Harrison, Kate;
Hahn, Sophie; Wengraf, Susan; Robinson, Rigel; Humbert, Mark; Kesarwani, Rashi

Subject: Urgent Support Needed: Resolution Opposing Fukushima Wastewater Discharge

WARNING: This is not a City of Berkeley email. Do not click links or attachments unless you trust the sender and know the content is
safe.

Dear Jesse Arreguin, Kate Harrison, Rashi Kesarwani, Terry Taplin, Ben Bartlett, Sophie Hahn, Susan Wengraf,

Rigel Robinson and Mark Humbert,

| hope this email finds you well. | am writing to express my strong support for Councilmember Kate Harrison's decision
to include the Resolution Opposing Tokyo Electric Power Company and the Government of Japan's Planned Discharge of
Wastewater from the Fukushima Daiichi Nuclear Power Plant into the Pacific Ocean on tomorrow's agenda at the
California Berkeley City Council. |

As a concerned citizen who respects and honors representatives sensitive to the needs of our planet, we must act in
solidarity with our friends in this crucial matter. Recently, Tokyo Electric Power Company announced its intention to
move forward with discharging radioactive wastewater into the ocean in the coming weeks. This development has
prompted various groups worldwide to unite and voice their concerns regarding the protection of our oceans.

In caring for and safeguarding our marine ecosystems, countries like Korea, Pacific Islands nations, numerous
institutions, global NGOs, and thousands of fishers have assumed the responsibility of creating educational awareness,
exploring alternative solutions, and seeking political resolutions. It is against this backdrop that the California Berkeley
City Council will be voting on the Resolution Opposing Tokyo Electric Power Company and the Government of Japan's
Planned Discharge of Wastewater from the Fukushima Daiichi Nuclear Power Plant into the Pacific Ocean.

| urge you to attentively listen to the stories, data, and experiences shared during the Council meeting, as they may
shape a better future for our oceans. The Ocean Health Cooperative, among other organizations, will present valuable
information that can contribute to informed decision-making.

In light of the gravity of the situation, | recommend that the California Berkeley City Council adopts the Resolution
opposing Tokyo Electric Power Company (TEPCO) and the government of Japan's plan to discharge wastewater from the
Fukushima Daiichi Nuclear Power Plant into the Pacific Ocean. Furthermore, | suggest that copies of this resolution be
sent to Secretary Blinken, Senator Dianne Feinstein, Senator Alex Padilla, and Representative Barbara Lee, in order to
raise awareness and garner support at the federal level.

It is crucial to consider the background surrounding this issue. Radioactive contamination from the Fukushima disaster
reached California's shores in 2015, and on April 13, 2021, the government of Japan announced TEPCO's plan to release
additional wastewater from the Fukushima Plant as soon as Spring of 2023. This proposed discharge raises alarming
concerns about the health of our planet and the well-being of future generations. Insufficient due diligence has been
conducted to ensure the safety of this action, and numerous experts have argued that TEPCO and the government of
Japan are proceeding without a proper understanding of the potential risks involved.

While TEPCO and the government of Japan assert that the wastewater has been treated and poses no environmental or
health risks, scientific evidence contradicts their claims. Many marine biologists, marine pollution experts, and scientists
have highlighted significant shortcomings in the due diligence process, particularly regarding the "Advanced Liquid
Processing System" (ALPS), the filtration system employed at the Fukushima site. This system is incapable of removing all
radioactive materials before the release.

----
Furthermore, in April 2021, three independent human rights experts appointed by the United Nations Human Rights
Council expressed their concerns about the impact of the Fukushima Daiichi wastewater dumping on millions of lives
and livelihoods in the Pacific region. They emphasized the considerable risks posed to environmental and human rights
globally.

It is important to note that on March 6, 2023, the city of West Hollywood passed a resolution opposing TEPCO and the

_ government of Japan's planned discharge of wastewater from the Fukushima Daiichi Nuclear Power Plant. By joining the
City of West Hollywood and tens of thousands of concerned citizens worldwide, the City of Berkeley can reaffirm its
position as a global environmental leader, committed to protecting our planet's natural resources.

In conclusion, | implore you to support Councilmember Kate Harrison's initiative and take a stand against the planned
discharge of wastewater from the Fukushima Daiichi Nuclear Power Plant into the Pacific Ocean. By adopting the
proposed resolution, the California Berkeley City Council can demonstrate its unwavering commitment to environmental
stewardship and send a powerful message to decision-makers at all levels.

Thank you for your attention to this pressing matter. | trust that you will consider the scientific evidence, environmental
implications, and the concerns of the global community when casting your vote. Please let me know if there is any
additional information or support | can provide.

Yours sincerely,

Torrance Carroll
20 S 2nd St. Unit 227
San Jose, CA 95113

torrancecarroll@gmail.com

----
172

Benado, Tony

From: Bindu Desai <btdesai@icloud.com>

Sent: Tuesday, July 11, 2023 8:46 AM
To: All Council
Subject: Resolution Opposing Tokyo Electric Power Company and the Government of Japan’s

Planned Discharge of Wastewater from Fukushima Daiichi Nuclear Power Plant into the
Pacific Ocean
Attachments: BTI Letter to Berkeley City Council-1.pdf

WARNING: This is not a City of Berkeley email. Do not click links or attachments unless you trust the sender and know the content is
safe. :

Dear Mayor/ Council Member,

| recommend that you:

Adopt a Resolution opposing Tokyo Electric Power Company (TEPCO) and the
government of Japan’s plan to discharge wastewater from Fukushima Daiichi Nuclear
Power Plant into the Pacific Ocean and send copies of this resolution to Secretary
Blinken, Senator Dianne Feinstein, Senator Alex Padilla, and Representative Barbara Lee.
Am attaching a 3 page letter to you from Seaver Wang, PhD. Earth and Ocean Sciences Co-:
Director, Climate and Energy of The Breakthrough

Institute seaver@thebreakthrough.org which explains the issue in detall.

In anticipation of your support,
Bindu T Desai MD

----
BREAKTHROUGH |

INSTITUTE
July 06, 2023
To: Honaratile Mayor and Members of the City Council |
From: Dr. Seaver Wang and colleagues at the Breakthrough Institute

Subject: We Strongly Oppose Councilmember Harrison's Symbolic and Non-Scientific Proposed Resolution
Criticizing the Government of Japan's Planned Discharge of Wastewater from the Fukushima Daiichi
Nuclear Power Plant.

Any visitor walking along Berkeley's sunny streets will read the same message posted in front of house after
house, in window after window: “In this house we believe science is real.” with Berkeley hosting one of the
nation’s proudest public universities and a prestigious National Laboratory, this communal respect for the
scientific method and for critical analysis should surprise nobody.

As such, we find it highly disappointing that Councilmember Kate Harrison has recently proposed a new
resolution calling for the city of Berkeley to formally oppose Japan's planned discharge of objectively
harmless wastewater from the Fukushima Daiichi Nuclear Power Plant.

Councilmember Harrison's resolution grossly overstates the negligible risks posed by the release of treated
water from the Fukushima facility. If the average person were to drink 2 liters of water per day directly
from the planned Fukushima releases (following desalination) for a full year at the planned upper limit
concentration of 40,500 picocuries/liter (1500 bequerels/L)!, their total added dose of radiation would be
0.0197 millisieverts (Sv)’, the equivalent of less than one-fifth the dose of a medical chest X-ray (0.1 mSv)’,
and approximately the added radiation exposure from a single 5-hour coast-to-coast airline flight (0.02
mSv).‘ The planned Fukushima release is already around just one-seventh of the World Health
Organization’s threshold for tritium in drinking water.°

1 international Atomic Energy Agency. “IAEA Review of Safety Related Aspects of Handling ALPS-Treated Water at
TEPCO’s Fukushima Daiichi Nuclear Power Station: Report 5: Review Mission to NRA.” 2023.

2 730.5 liters x 1500 Bq/L x 1.8E-11 Sv/Bq (dose coefficient for.tritium, in Sv/Bq, from Radiological Aspects. World
Health Organization, 2022. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK579448/)

3 Harvard Health. “Radiation Risk from Medical Imaging,” September 22, 2010.
https://www.health.harvard.edu/cancer/radiation-risk-from-medical-imaging.

4 Friedberg, W; Copeland K (2011). “lonizing Radiation in Earth's Atmosphere and in Space Near Earth" Civil
Aerospace Medical Institute, Federal Aviation Administration, DOT/FAA/AM- 11/9. 7
5° “Is Fukushima Wastewater Release Safe? What the Science Says.” Nature 618, no. 7967 (June 22, 2023): 894-95.
https://doi.org/10.1038/d41586-023-02057-y.

2054 University Ave a eae info@thebreakthrough.org |
Suite 500 : www.thebreakthrough.org

Berkeley, CA 94704


----
BRE AKTHROUGH-

INSTITUTE

Dilution of the Fukushima release by a little over a factor of two would put the release well below the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency's threshold for tritium in water of 20,000 pCi/L. Needless to say, the vast
Pacific Ocean is approximately 700,000,000,000 times larger in volume than all the stored wastewater at
Fukushima, which would in any event only be released gradually over the span of decades. Scientific
measurements will struggle to detect any signal from the released water relative to naturally-occuring
background radiation in seawater even within a few tens of kilometers of the release. In their final report
reviewing the safety of water treated at the Fukushima power plant, the International Atomic Energy -
Agency determined that the planned release will “have a negligible radiological impact” and is “consistent
with relevant international safety standards.”® My colleagues and Tat the Breakthrough Institute would be
happy to drink the treated water, if provided, at a future City Council meeting to publicly demonstrate that
the water is entirely safe...

By the time any water molecules from the coast of Japan reach the coast of California, a oceanic circulation
process requiring around 2-3 years,’ no scientific instrument on Earth will be able to distinguish any
remaining additional radioactivity from the release. Clearly, Councilmember Kate Harrison's claim that the
release “could impact millions of lives and livelihoods in the Pacific region” and “imposes considerable.
risks to environmental and human rights across the globe” amounts to nothing but sheer political theater.
The risk to Berkeley “residents and businesses” is, quite literally, zero.

We further note that many of the experts and organizations that Councilmember Harrison has chosen to
quote represent explicitly anti-nuclear advocacy groups, including Greenpeace International, Friends of the
Earth, and No Nukes Action. These single-mindedly traditionalist activist organizations have remained
ideologically opposed to the promise of clean nuclear energy for helping societies worldwide act against
climate change. Their critique of the planned Fukushima release is primarily intended to stigmatize
nuclear energy. Councilmember Harrison's draft resolution meanwhile ignores a vast array of scientifically
rigorous and open-minded researchers, more forward-thinking advocates, and institutions that support
clean nuclear power as a critical tool alongside wind, solar, batteries, and other low-carbon energy sources
in decarbonizing the global energy system.® .

In response to Councilmember Harrison’s invocation of social justice, we assert that anti-nuclear
misinformation represents the far larger and more real injustice faced by Japanese, Asian, and Pacific

© International Atomic Energy Agency. “IAEA Finds Japan’s Plans to Release Treated Water into the Sea at
Fukushima Consistent with International Safety Standards.” July 4, 2023.
https://www.iaea.org/newscenter/pressreleases/iaea-finds-japans-plans- -to- release-treated-water-into-the- -Sea-at-
fukushima-consistent-with-international-safety-standards.

7 “Ocean Surface Currents | Manoa. Hawaii.Edu/ExploringOurFluidEarth.” Accessed July 2, 2023.
https://manoa.hawaii.edu/exploringourfluidearth/physical/atmospheric-effects/ocean-surface-currents.

8 Build Nuclear Now. “Build Nuclear Now.” Accessed July 2, 2023. https://www.buildnuclearnow.org.

2054 University Ave | info@thebreakthrough.org
Suite 500 www.thebreakthrough.org
Berkeley, CA 94704


----
BREAKTHROUGH
INSTITUTE

peoples because of the exaggerated discourse on the Fukushima water release issue. Anti-nuclear activists,
‘playing to radiation-related historical traumas and vastly inflating the public health and environmental
risks posed by the release, have inflicted arid continue to inflict undue anxiety upon communities across
the Asia-Pacific, while threatening economic harm to the peoples of Fukushima, Miyagi, and Ibaraki
Prefectures in Japan. These organizations would celebrate the shutdown of nuclear power stations across
Asia, even if this prolongs the continued operation of fossil fuel power plants that contribute to climate
change and would directly sicken more Japanese, Korean, or Taiwanese people from air pollution.

We strongly urge the other members of the Berkeley City Council to reject Councilmember Harrison's empty
resolution in the most forceful terms. And we rebuke Councilmember Harrison for occupying the city’s
public agenda with a resolution that is at best political grandstanding, and at worst environmentally
counterproductive and harmful to social justice.

Sincerely yours,

Seaver Wang, PhD. Earth and Ocean Sciences
Co-Director, Climate and Energy
The Breakthrough Institute

seaver@thebreakthrough.org

The Breakthrough Institute
2054 University Ave Suite 500
Berkeley, CA 94704

' www.thebreakthrough.org
2054 University Ave _ info@thebreakthrough.org
r — Suite 500 www.thebreakthrough.org

Berkeley, CA 94704


----
173

Benado, Tony ,

From: ; Eva Frye <eva@twohandsbrands.com>
Sent: Tuesday, July 11, 2023 8:37 AM
To: ) All Council; Berkeley Mayor's Office; City Clerk; Kesarwani, Rashi; Taplin, Terry; Bartlett,

Ben; Harrison, Kate; Hahn, Sophie; Wengraf, Susan; Robinson, Rigel; Humbert, Mark;
Phoebe Thomas Sorgen; Dana Ngo; david mcguire; Mico Malecki, Chizu Hamada; J.
George Lippman; gmorizawa@yahoo.com morizawa

Subject: Support for Kate Harrison's Fukushima Opposition

WARNING: This is not a City of Berkeley email. Do not click links or attachments unless you trust the sender and know the content is
safe.
Dear Dear Mayor Arreguin and members of the Berkeley City Council:

| am writing to express my strong support for councilmember Kate Harrison's Resolution Opposing Tokyo Electric Power
Company (TEPCO) and the Government of Japan's Planned Discharge of Wastewater from the Fukushima Daiichi Nuclear
Power Plant into the Pacific Ocean on today's agenda at Berkeley City Council.

Untrustworthy players
As we know, the Fukushima incident was preventable, but happened due to bad decisions and poor leadership (all you

have to do is google "was Fukushima preventable" to see the multitud of evidence). Sadly, in more than a decade since,
TEPCO has still not changed. In the 18 months that the expert panel has reviewed TEPCO's data, they've been disturbed

by the poor data collection methods, data that don't line up with science, and obfuscation by the authorities.

Unfortunately, the International Atomic.Energy Agency (IAEA) both promotes nuclear energy, and is its own watchdog.
An inherent conflict of interests. Also, about 10% of the IAEA's operating budget comes from Japan (and did in 2021, see
page 131). So the IAEA cannot be trusted to be unbiased in this case.

Outdated safety standards

As we have worked directly with the third panel party of experts, they keep hammering this home: the safety standards
are not in line with the latest science. The IAEA’s safety standards for tritium don’t make a distinction between
men and.women, there is one estimate for generic “adults” which shows its safety standards are also
discriminatory against women, AND the most recent data and research they cite is from 2004, nearly twenty
years ago. Yet we know that women and children are more sensitive to the effects of radiation. US drinking

water’s standard limit was set without detailed assessment of what it would take to protect the embryo or the
fetus, especially in the first trimester.

Common sense, safer alternatives |

. The scientific community agrees—we cannot keep dumping waste in our environment. Especially when, in TEPCO's case,
the waste can be made into cement, safely stored, and actually used for ongoing construction on-site. We must follow
the Precautionary Principle. This is such a no brainer, it hurts.

Many parts of the US and California look to Berkeley as a shining example of how to push past outdated view, laws, and
science, as Berkeley shepherds in progressive laws and policies that the rest of California follows.

| trust that you'll vote to uphold public and environmental health and safety in this case.

Here is more reference material from the expert panel.

Thank you for your time, and important work.
Eva

----
_Eva Frye
Founder
Peep our new reel!
twohandsbrands.com
LI - t


----
174

Benado, Tony

From: Yuka Saito <sensory.awareness.japan@gmail.com>

Sent: ~ Tuesday, July 11, 2023 1:25 PM

To: All Council ,

Subject: Opposition to the Release of Contaminated Water from the Fukushima Daiichi Nuclear
Plant ,

WARNING: This is not a City of Berkeley email. Do not click links or attachments unless you trust the sender and know the content is
safe.

Dear Mayor Arreguin and members of the Berkeley City Council,

| hope this letter finds you in good health and high spirits. | am writing to express my deep concern and strong
opposition to the proposed release of contaminated water from the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear plant into the
Pacific Ocean. As a concerned citizen of Berkeley, | believe it is crucial for our city to take a stand against this
decision and protect the health and environment of our coastal waters. |

The Fukushima Daiichi nuclear plant, as you are aware, experienced a catastrophic meltdown following the
2011 earthquake and tsunami. The resulting contamination of water in the plant's storage tanks has posed an
ongoing challenge for the Japanese government. However, | firmly believe that releasing this contaminated
water into the ocean will have severe health and environmental consequences, not only for Japan but also for
coastal regions as far away as California.

First and foremost, the release of contaminated water into the ocean poses significant health risks to marine
life and human populations. Radioactive isotopes such as tritium, cesium, and strontium are known to
accumulate in seafood, which could eventually find its way into our food chain. Studies have shown that
exposure to these isotopes can lead to various health issues, including an increased risk of cancer, genetic
mutations, and developmental abnormalities. |

Furthermore, the marine ecosystem in the California coastal waters, which is already vulnerable to numerous
environmental threats, would be significantly impacted by the release of contaminated water. The potential
ecological damage cannot be underestimated, as radioactive isotopes could harm marine organisms, disrupt
the delicate balance of ecosystems, and have far-reaching consequences for the health of our oceans.

Safer alternatives exist, including safe storage and radioactive decay, bioremediation, and use of treated water
to make concrete for special applications (the latter option has been proposed by the Independent Expert

Panel to the Pacific Islands Forum. Their paper is available at https://cafethorium.whoi.edu/concrete-option/).

As a city known for its commitment to environmental stewardship and public health, | urge the Berkeley City
Council to take a principled stance against the release of contaminated water from the Fukushima Daiichi
nuclear plant. | kindly request that the Council pass a resolution or issue a statement expressing our
opposition to this proposal. | believe it is our moral obligation to protect the well-being of our coastal waters,
marine life, and the health of our community.

Thank you for your attention to this urgent matter. | trust that you will carefully consider the potential risks
and ramifications of releasing contaminated water from the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear plant. Your decisive
action would not only safeguard our environment but also set an example for other communities to follow.

1

----
Yours sincerely,

Yuka Saito

----
175
Benado, Tony

From: Laura Feldman <feldman.le@gmail.com>

Sent: Tuesday, July 11, 2023 12:23 PM

To: All Council ,

Subject: Re: Opposition to TEPCOs plan to dump radioactive wastewater into the Pacific ocean

WARNING: This is not a City of Berkeley email. Do not click links or attachments unless you trust the sender and know the content is
; . safe...
Dear Mayor Arreguin and City Council members,

| live in Portland, Oregon, downriver from the Hanford Nuclear Weapons site, and | know that dumping Fukushima
wastes into the Pacific for the next 30 plus years would be a tragic mistake.

Please support this resolution
To oppose this plan.

The ocean is life.

Respectfully,
Laura Feldman

----
176

Benado, Tony

From: ~ Linda <lroman@mindspring.com>

Sent: Tuesday, July 11, 2023 2:55 PM

To: All Council

Subject: Waste water from the Fukushima Daiichi Nuclear Power Plant

WARNING: This is not a City of Berkeley email. Do not click links or attachments unless you trust the
sender and know the content is safe.

To Whom It May Concern,

| am writing to urge you to oppose Japan's discharge of 1.3 million tons of radioactive waste into the
Pacific Ocean. It is absolutely false that such a "dump" poses no risk to public health, human, animal
and vegetal. It is also untrue that the resultant radioactivity will not reach our coast. Much of the
detritus from the tsunami and implo-sion of the power plant landed along the California coast. The
same will happen if the huge amount of toxic water is dumped. .

| hope you will adopt the Resollution on Consent tomorrow night toward stopping this dangerous
release. | hope you will not be swayed by the Breakthrough Institute's bogus science on this
question. This plan by the Japanese Government puts the Nuclear Free Berkeley Act in jeopardy.
Thank you for your attention to this very serious situation.

Sincerely,

Linda Roman,

734 Walker Avenue, Oakland, CA, lroman@mindspring.com

----
177

Benado, Tony

From: Liz Taylor <liz@doermarine.com>

' Sent: Tuesday, July 11, 2023 3:08 PM
To: All Council; Berkeley Mayor's Office; City Clerk

Subject: support for resolution

WARNING: This is not a City of Berkeley email. Do not click links or attachments unless you trust the sender and know the content is
‘safe.

Good afternoon
I’m writing to support a vote FOR the Resolution Opposing Tokyo Electric Power Company and the government of Japan’s
Planned Discharge of Wastewater from Fukushima Daiichi Nuclear Power Plant into the Pacific Ocean that the council i is

considering at today’s méeting. :

We now know that dilution is not the solution to pollution. Rather, releasing this water will fundamentally change ocean
chemistry, both locally and across the Pacific as waste water is carried via currents. Following the tsunami and initial
disaster, radioactivity was detected in the flesh of tuna caught in California waters. Large fishes bio-accumulate things
like PCBs, mercury, and radiation making their way back to humans when consumed. We already have a number of
precautionary warnings on fish/shellfish consumption — it. seems madness to dump this water, laden with persistent
radioactive isotopes, into our food web.

Id like to encourage more collaboration between our excellent scientific minds at CAL and those in Japan to find
enduring solutions to cleaning up water contaminated by human activities around the world. Water, and fresh drinking
water in particular, is a finite resource. Why not put all best efforts into developing methods to separate and sequester
contaminates from water such that it can be returned to the environment without causing damage to wildlife and
human health?

Thanks for your time and attention

Liz Taylor .
Alameda CA

----
178

Benado, Tony

From: Jacqueline Cabasso <wslf@earthlink.net>
Sent: Tuesday, July 11, 2023 3:23 PM

To: Ail Council
Ce: Elgstrand, Stefan; Arreguin, Jesse L.

Subject: IN SUPPORT OF Resolution Opposing Tokyo Electric Power Company and the
Government of Japan's Planned Discharge of Wastewater from Fukushima Daiichi
Nuclear Power Plant into the Pacific Ocean
Attachments: . _WSLF letter to Berkeley City Council.docx

WARNING: This is not a City of Berkeley email. Do not click links or attachments unless you trust the sender and know the content is |
safe.

Western States Legal Foundation
655 13" Street, Suite 201
Oakland, CA 94612
(510) 839-5877 e www.wslifweb.org

\

July 11.2023
Dear Mayor Arreguin and members of the Berkeley City Council,

Western States Legal Foundation, based in Oakland, is a nonprofit, tax- exempt organization
established in 1982 to provide legal support for nonviolent protesters challenging the construction of
the Diablo Canyon Nuclear Power Plant. While our efforts over the years have focused primarily on
advocacy for the elimination of nuclear weapons, we remain firmly opposed to nuclear power for
many reasons. The ongoing dire situation at Fukushima Daiichi is one of them.

We write in support of Council member Kate Harrison’s “Resolution Opposing Tokyo Electric.
Power Company and the Government of Japan’s Planned Discharge of Wastewater from
Fukushima Daiichi Nuclear Power Plant into the Pacific Ocean.”"'!

The Japanese Government and TEPCO (Tokyo Electric Power Company) are planning to discharge’
over |.3 million tons of treated water from the Advanced Liquid Processing System stored in tanks on
the Fukushima Daiichi Nuclear Power Plant site into the Pacific Ocean for more than 40 years, starting
as soon as this summer. As a result, dangerous radionuclides could flow across the ocean to Russia,
Alaska, Canada, Hawaii, and the U.S. West Coast. »

There is no precedent in Japan or any other country for a “disposal method” such as “treating” a large
amount of radioactively contaminated water generated from contact with molten fuel debris at a
nuclear reactor after a severe accident. There is no previous experience in diluting such water with an
even more enormous amount of seawater, then systematically releasing it into the ocean over several
decades. This treated water will contain more than 60 radionuclides, including carbon-14, cesium-137
and strontium-90, which the Advanced Liquid Processing System cannot altogether remove.

----
Intentionally discharging radioactive water into the ocean is contrary to the intent of the London
Convention and London Protocol, to which Japan is a party.!"! Such a discharge also violates the human
rights of people not only in Japan but also in many other countries that share the Pacific Ocean. UN |
Special Rapporteurs have expressed concern that this decision could threaten human health and the
environment. ltt! :

- The Pacific Islands Forum, a regional bloc of 18 island nations, has raised concerns about the release of
the radioactively contaminated water, including its impact on fisheries. Just today, at a meeting held in
the Cook Islands between Pacific Island leaders and the Director General of the International Atomic
Energy Agency, Rafael Grossi, Cook Islands Prime Minister Mark Brown told the participants that the
Pacific's nuclear testing legacy continues to affect its people and ocean, eight decades on.!! The
dumping of massive quantities of radioactive water into the ocean would add insult to injury.

In December 2022, the U.S. National Association of Marine Laboratories, an association of over 100
laboratories, issued a Position Paper titled, “Scientific opposition to Japan’s planned release of over 1.3
million tons of radioactively contaminated water from the Fukushima-Daiichi Nuclear Power Plant
disaster into the Pacific Ocean.” The statement begins: :

“The National Association of Marine Laboratories (NAML), an organization of more than 100 member
laboratories, opposes Japan’s plans to begin releasing-over 1.3 million tons of radioactively
contaminated water from the Fukushima-Daiichi Nuclear Power Plant into the Pacific Ocean -
commencing in 2023. This opposition is based on the fact that there is a lack of adequate and accurate
_ scientific data supporting Japan’s assertion of safety. Furthermore, there is an abundance of data
demonstrating serious concerns about releasing radioactively contaminated water.” |

The statement concludes with a rational, scientifically responsible recommendation:

“We urge the Government of Japan to stop pursuing their planned and precedent-setting release of the
radioactively contaminated water into the Pacific Ocean and to work with the broader scientific
community to pursue other approaches that protect ocean life; human health; and those communities

who depend on ecologically, economically, and culturally valuable marine resources.”™!

We agree with this recommendation and urge the Berkeley City Council to go on record against
Japan’s planned release of radioactively contaminated water into the Pacific Ocean.

Thank you for your consideration.

Jacqueline Cabasso, Executive Director, Western States Legal Foundation

Sent from Mail for Windows

[il 2023-07-11 Item 29 Resolution Opposing Tokyo Electric.pdf (berkeleyca.gov)

2

----
Western States Legal Foundation
655 13% Street, Suite 201
Oakland, CA 94612
(510) 839-5877 e www.wslfweb.org

July 11. 2023
Dear Mayor Arreguin and members of the Berkeley City Council,

Western States Legal Foundation, based in Oakland, is a nonprofit, tax- exempt organization
established in 1982 to provide legal support for nonviolent protesters challenging the
construction of the Diablo Canyon Nuclear Power Plant. While our efforts over the years have
focused primarily on advocacy for the elimination of nuclear weapons, we remain firmly
opposed to nuclear power for many reasons. The ongoing dire situation at Fukushima Daiichi is
one of them.

We write in support of Council member Kate Harrison’s “Resolution Opposing Tokyo
Electric Power Company and the Government of Japan’s Planned Discharge of
Wastewater from Fukushima Daiichi Nuclear Power Plant into the Pacific Ocean.”

The Japanese Government and TEPCO (Tokyo Electric Power Company) are planning to
discharge over 1.3 million tons of treated water from the Advanced Liquid Processing System
stored in tanks on the Fukushima Daiichi Nuclear Power Plant site into the Pacific Ocean for
more than 40 years, starting as soon as this summer. As a result, dangerous radionuclides could
flow across the ocean to Russia, Alaska, C anada,: Hawaii, and the U.S. West Coast.

_ There is no precedent in Japan or any other country for a “disposal method” such as “treating” a
large amount of radioactively contaminated water generated from contact with molten fuel debris

ata nuclear reactor after a severe accident. There is no previous experience in diluting such

water with an even more enormous amount of seawater, then systematically releasing it into the
ocean over several decades. This treated water will contain more than 60 radionuclides, |
including carbon-14, cesium-137 and strontium-90, which the Advanced Liquid Processing °
System cannot altogether remove.

Intentionally discharging radioactive water into the ocean is contrary to the intent of the London
Convention and London Protocol, to which Japan is a party.” Such a discharge also violates the
human rights of people not only in Japan but also in many other countries that share the Pacific
Ocean. UN Special Rapporteurs have expressed concern that this decision could threaten human
health and the environment.

The Pacific Islands Forum, a regional bloc of 18 island nations, has raised concerns about the
release of the radioactively contaminated water, including its impact on fisheries. Just today, at
a meeting held in the Cook Islands between Pacific Island leaders and the Director General of the
International Atomic Energy Agency, Rafael Grossi, Cook Islands Prime Minister Mark |

----
Brown told the participants that the Pacific's nuclear testing legacy continues to affect its people
and ocean, eight decades on.* The dumping of massive quantities of radioactive water into the
ocean would add insult to injury. : :

In December 2022, the U.S. National Association of Marine Laboratories, an association of over
100 laboratories, issued a Position Paper titled, “Scientific opposition to Japan’s planned release
of over 1.3 million tons of radioactively contaminated water from the Fukushima-Daiichi
Nuclear Power Plant disaster into the Pacific Ocean.” The statement begins:

“The National Association of Marine Laboratories (NAML), an organization of more than 100
member laboratories, opposes Japan’s plans to begin releasing over 1.3 million tons of
radioactively contaminated water from the Fukushima-Daiichi Nuclear Power Plant into the
Pacific Ocean commencing in 2023. This opposition is based on the fact that there is a lack of -
adequate and accurate scientific data supporting Japan’s assertion of safety. Furthermore, there is
an abundance of data. demonstrating serious concerns about releasing radioactively contaminated
water.”

The statement concludes with a rational, scientifically responsible recommendation:

“We urge the Government of Japan to stop pursuing their planned and precedent-setting release
of the radioactively contaminated water into the Pacific Ocean and to work with the broader
scientific community to pursue other approaches that protect ocean life; human health; and those
communities who depend on ecologically, economically, and culturally valuable marine
resources.”°

We agree with this recommendation and urge the Berkeley City Council to go on record against
Japan’s planned release of radioactively contaminated water into the Pacific Ocean.

Thank you for your consideration.

Jacqueline Cabasso, Executive Director, Western States Legal Foundation

1 2023-07-11 Item 29 Resolution Opposing Tokyo Electric.pdf (berkeleyca.gov)
2 Ocean Dumping: International Treaties | US EPA
3 Japan: UN experts ‘deeply disappointed’ by decision to discharge Fukushima water | UN News

4 UN nuclear watchdog briefs Pacific Islands amid Fukushima water discharge concern (msn.com)
5 2022-12 Position Paper: Release of Radioactively Contaminated Water into the Ocean (naml.org)


----
179

Benado, Tony |
en!

From: Cross Pollinators <cross.pollinators@gmail.com>

Sent: | Tuesday, July 11, 2023 8:21 PM |

To: All Council

Subject: Opposition to the Release of Contaminated Water from the Fukushima Daiichi Nuclear
Plant

WARNING: This is not a City of Berkeley email. Do not click links or attachments unless you trust the sender and know the content is
safe.
Dear Mayor Arreguin and members of the Berkeley City Council,

| hope this letter finds you in good health and high spirits. | am writing to express my deep concern and strong
opposition to the proposed release of contaminated water from the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear plant into the Pacific
Ocean. As a concerned citizen of Berkeley, | believe it is crucial for our city to take a stand against this decision and
protect the health and environment of our coastal waters. .

The Fukushima Daiichi nuclear plant, as you are aware, experienced a catastrophic meltdown following the 2011
earthquake and tsunami. The resulting contamination of water in the plant's storage tanks has posed an ongoing.
challenge for the Japanese government. However, | firmly believe that releasing this contaminated water into the ocean
will have severe health and environmental consequences, not only for Japan but also for coastal regions as far away as
California. ) :

First and foremost, the release of contaminated water into the ocean poses significant health risks to marine life and
human populations. Radioactive isotopes such as tritium, cesium, and strontium are known to accumulate in seafood,
which could eventually find its way into our food chain. Studies have shown that exposure to these isotopes can lead to
various health issues, including an increased risk of cancer, genetic mutations, and developmental abnormalities.

Furthermore, the marine ecosystem in the California coastal waters, which is already vulnerable to numerous
environmental threats, would be significantly impacted by the release of contaminated water. The potential ecological
damage cannot be underestimated, as radioactive isotopes could harm marine organisms, disrupt the delicate balance
of ecosystems, and have far-reaching consequences for the health of our oceans.

Safer alternatives exist, including safe storage and radioactive decay, bioremediation, and use of treated water to make
concrete for special applications (the latter option has been proposed by the Independent Expert Panel to the Pacific

Islands Forum. Their paper is available at https://cafethorium.whoi.edu/concrete-option/).

As a city known for its commitment to environmental stewardship and public health, | urge the Berkeley City Council to
take a principled stance against the release of contaminated water from the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear plant. | kindly
request that the Council pass a resolution or issue a statement expressing our opposition to this proposal. | believe it is
our moral obligation to protect the well-being of our coastal waters, marine life, and the health of our community.

Thank you for your attention to this urgent matter. | trust that you will carefully consider the potential risks and
ramifications of releasing contaminated water from the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear plant. Your decisive action would not
_ only safeguard our environment but also set an example for other communities to follow.

_ Yours sincerely,

Eri Tomita
A former resident of Berkeley and a current resident of Osaka, Japan

----
Eri Suzuki Tomita BAA (#2) 3 Cross Pollinator
cross.pollinators@gmail.com

httos://www.crosspollinators.org/ja

x Tokyo Urban Permaculture RRP —/NU/N—WY ALF + — Advisor team http://www.tokyourbanpermaculture.com/

we Edible Media (€#% —http://edible-media.com/ | . .
x Edible Schoolyard Japan LF 4 DIVLAD—IV— KV eA F-IPVIANGA— http://www.edibleschoolyard-japan.org/

----
180

Benado, Tony | | . |
i i

From: | Hasegawa Reiko <soundofjade@hotmail.com>

Sent: , Tuesday, July 11, 2023 11:00 PM

To: All Council

Subject: Opposition to the Release of Contaminated Water from the Fukushima Daiichi Nuclear
Plant

WARNING: This is not a City of Berkeley email. Do not click links or atiachments unless you trust the
sender and know the content is safe.

Reiko Hasegawa
6424 Regent st
Oakland, CA 94618

7/11/2023

Berkeley City Council
2180 Milvia Street
Berkeley, CA 94704

Dear Mayor Arreguin and members of the Berkeley City Council,

| hope this letter finds you in good health and high spirits. | am writing to express my deep concern
and strong opposition to the proposed release of contaminated water from the Fukushima Daiichi
nuclear plant into the Pacific Ocean. As a concerned citizen of Berkeley, | believe it is crucial for our
city to take a stand against this decision and protect the health and environment of our coastal
waters.

The Fukushima Daiichi nuclear plant, as you are aware, experienced a catastrophic meltdown
following the 2011 earthquake and tsunami. The resulting contamination of water in the plant's
storage tanks has. posed an ongoing challenge for the Japanese government. However, | firmly
believe that releasing this contaminated water into the ocean will have severe health and
environmental consequences, not only for Japan but also for coastal regions as far away as
California. —

First and foremost, the release of contaminated water into the ocean poses significant health risks to
marine life and human populations. Radioactive isotopes such as tritium, cesium, and strontium are
known to accumulate in seafood, which could eventually find its way into our food chain. Studies have
shown that exposure to these isotopes can lead to various health issues, including an increased risk
of cancer, genetic mutations, and developmental abnormalities.

Furthermore, the marine ecosystem in the California coastal waters, which is already vulnerable to
numerous environmental threats, would be significantly impacted by the release of contaminated
water. The potential ecological damage cannot be underestimated, as radioactive isotopes could
harm marine organisms, disrupt the delicate balance of F ecosystems, and have far-reaching
consequences for the health of our oceans.

----
Safer alternatives exist, including safe storage and radioactive decay, bioremediation, and use of
treated water to make concrete for special applications (the latter option has been proposed by the
Independent Expert Panel to the Pacific Islands Forum. Their paper is available at
https://cafethorium.whoi.edu/concrete-option/).

As a city known for its commitment to environmental stewardship and public health, | urge the
Berkeley City Council to take a principled stance against the release of contaminated water from the
Fukushima Daiichi nuclear plant. | kindly request that the Council pass a resolution or issue a
statement expressing our opposition to this proposal. | believe it is our moral obligation to protect the
well-being of our coastal waters, marine life, and the health of our community.

Thank you for your attention to this urgent matter. | trust that you will carefully consider the potential
risks and ramifications of releasing contaminated water from the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear plant.
Your decisive action would not only safeguard our environment but also set an example for other
communities to follow. .

Yours sincerely,

Reiko Hasegawa

Sent from my iPhone

----
181

Benado, Tony.

From: Dezz <earthtodezz@gmail.com>

Sent: Tuesday, July 11, 2023 4:52 PM
To: All Council; Berkeley Mayor's Office; City Clerk
Subject: Protecting Our Ocean and Local Water

WARNING: This is not a City of Berkeley email. Do not click links or attachments unless you trust the sender and know the content is
safe,

Dear Jesse Arreguin, Kate Harrison, Rashi Kesarwani, Terry Taplin, Ben Bartlett, Sophie Hahn, Susan Wengraf, Rigel

Robinson, and Mark Humbert,

| hope you're all doing well. I'm reaching out to express my enthusiastic support for Councilmember Kate Harrison's
decision to include the Resolution Opposing Tokyo Electric Power Company and the Government of Japan's Planned
Discharge of Wastewater from the Fukushima Daiichi Nuclear Power Plant into the Pacific Ocean on today's agenda at
the California Berkeley City Council.

As a concerned citizen who deeply values representatives who prioritize our planet's well-being, | believe it's crucial for
us to stand united on this important matter. Tokyo Electric Power Company recently made public its intention to release
radioactive wastewater into the ocean in the coming weeks. This announcement has sparked global concern and
mobilized various groups worldwide to voice their apprehensions regarding the preservation of our precious oceans.

Numerous countries, such as Korea and Pacific Islands nations, along with countless institutions, global NGOs, and
dedicated fishers, have taken it upon themselves to raise awareness, explore alternative solutions, and pursue political
avenues to safeguard our marine ecosystems. Against this backdrop, the California Berkeley City Council will soon vote
on the Resolution Opposing Tokyo Electric Power Company and the Government of Japan's Planned Discharge of
Wastewater from the Fukushima Daiichi Nuclear Power Plant into the Pacific Ocean.

| implore each of you to attentively listen to the stories, data, and experiences that will be shared during the Council
meeting, as they hold the potential to shape a brighter future for our oceans. The Ocean Health Cooperative, among
other esteemed organizations, will provide valuable insights that can contribute to informed decision-making.

Considering the gravity of the situation, | wholeheartedly recommend that the California Berkeley City Council embraces
the Resolution opposing Tokyo Electric Power Company (TEPCO) and the government of Japan's proposed release of
wastewater from the Fukushima Daiichi Nuclear Power Plant into the Pacific Ocean. Furthermore, | propose that copies
of this resolution be sent to Secretary Blinken, Senator Dianne Feinstein, Senator Alex Padilla, and Representative

- Barbara Lee to raise awareness and garner support at the federal level.

It is of utmost importance to consider the context surrounding this issue. Back in 2015, radioactive contamination from
the Fukushima disaster reached California's shores, and on April 13, 2021, the government of Japan announced TEPCO's
plan to discharge additional wastewater from the Fukushima Plant as early as Spring of 2023. This planned release raises
serious concerns about the health of our planet and the well-being of future generations. Insufficient due diligence has
been undertaken to ensure the safety of this action, and numerous experts argue that TEPCO and the government of
Japan are proceeding without a comprehensive understanding of the potential risks involved.

While TEPCO and the government of Japan maintain that the wastewater has been adequately treated and poses no
environmental or health risks, scientific evidence contradicts their claims. Marine biologists, marine pollution experts,
and scientists have highlighted significant deficiencies in the due diligence process, particularly regarding the
effectiveness of the "Advanced Liquid Processing System" (ALPS), the filtration system employed at the Fukushima site.
Regrettably, this system falls short in its ability to remove all radioactive materials before releasing the wastewater.

1

----
Furthermore, in April 2021, three independent human rights experts appointed by the United Nations Human Rights
Council expressed their concerns about the impact of the Fukushima Daiichi wastewater dumping on millions of lives
and livelihoods in the Pacific region. They emphasized the substantial risks this poses to global environmental and
human rights. .

It's worth mentioning that on March 6, 2023, the city of West Hollywood passed a resolution opposing TEPCO and the
government of Japan's intended discharge of wastewater from the Fukushima Daiichi Nuclear Power Plant. By aligning
with the City of West Hollywood and joining the ranks of tens of thousands of concerned citizens worldwide, the City of
Berkeley can reassert its position as a leading global environmental advocate, fully committed to preserving our planet's
invaluable resources. .

In conclusion, | implore each of you to support Councilmember Kate Harrison's initiative and take a firm stance against
the planned discharge of wastewater from the Fukushima Daiichi Nuclear Power Plant into the Pacific Ocean. By
adopting the proposed resolution, the California Berkeley City Council can showcase its unwavering dedication to
environmental stewardship and send a resounding message to decision-makers at all levels.

Thank you for your attention to this pressing matter. | trust that you will conscientiously weigh the scientific evidence,
environmental implications, and concerns of the global community when casting your vote. Please do not hesitate to
reach out if there's any additional information or support | can provide.

Yours sincerely,

Desiree McGill

----
182

Foxe _g_ gs i =

J | J —t

[ aan = — ae Se a : ee ane ane [ : < es | a
a a a J ‘ y > , mm | > ~ v q aa | 4 ~ 4 q 4 . y > y > —— y ~
‘ b ey » i y a \ a we Bee a | ‘ lm ' 4 2 » a a | ig w@ | a ae ea.

<a £3 | = | fo) 7 ae } | | | m= | : ; = | | | @ fi] 1, &
Sa a _ 1 Vay | | | | > | =
os ‘| lg = eT | 7 1 : ==, os | fa | | | 1 i | =:
ey | | L ~ | @ \ | | @ Lo A An) 1 ou y ( oo . nn @ _, , Oe |
— qq hh 4. 2 BR gf | . 4 oo om | { X -~ gf | _ ao 4 | Wr . - 4

Zoning Ordinance amendments to conform to State law relating to special needs
housing, employment housing and parking; and non-substantive technical
corrections

is or

r

----
1. State Laws
2. Technical edits

3. Recommendation


----
State Law - Updates

State Laws related to housing ¢ AB101 - Low Barrier Navigation ¢ Employee Housing Act
¢ Household Center

¢ $B234 - Supportive Child Care
¢ AB139 & AB2399 - Emergency ¢ SB2 &SB745 - Transitional and Family Home
Shelter Supportive Housing

e Lanterman Act - Residential Care

Glossary Allowed Use Specific Use
Definitions Tables Requirements


----
AB2097 - Minimum parking requirements

Prohibits the City from imposing a minimum off-street automobile parking
requirement on most development projects in any zoning district located within ¥% mile
of a high-quality transit stop.

Summary of Proposed Changes

¢ Update required parking applicability to exclude new uses or enlargement or
intensification of existing uses, located within % mile of a high quality transit stop

----
AB2097

Legend

ao
or
“
_
f=
1 a tn i
— Zp! A
—_—— — —¥
| .t =; Fr
aan

Pa CoB_Boundary
ae
sy ©:
\. \ = ty, :
i} 2
ie AWE

sit
Cragmont
| | .
‘i : 3
Kicl aughlin

|
soland *"
1 if
Eastshore \
State Park

CoBMask
den Regional

CA HQ Transit Stops

°

Half mile buffer high quality transit stop
BufferedFeatures

Ag
3% South
Berkeley

mussel! St 43)

----
Non- Substantive Technical Edits

Public, Staff and Zoning Officer

Text Errors and Text Omissions

Technical edits are related to the
City’s effort to replace and update
the Berkeley Municipal Code Staff Review

Proposed Zoning Amendments

----
183 ~
=

Staff Shortages: City Services
Constrained by Staff Retention
Challenges and Delayed Hiring

it i ithe
. EE TRE IEE ERIE
ow RS oc Bi RS yaa
BO er eR ET
UR ep a rc ET =
(tao chiepteieeeeeeeetet cones ee ss :
; =e Bar 3 Sea

alu BERKELEY CITY AUDITOR

W
rTi
A
A
rTi
»
—<

----
»taff Shortages:
City Services
Constrained by

otaff Retention
Challenges and
Delayed Hiring

Why we did this audit
Objectives

Findings
Recommendations
Management response

BERKELEY CIty AUDITOR

----
Why we did this audit:

¢ Staff shortages and employee retention issues in cn
past audits.

Berkeley Police:
: : P Improvements
¢ City staffing challenges impact almost everyone Needed to Manage
. . « — Overtime and
who lives in, works in, or visits Berkeley. Security Work for

Outside Entities

¢ Retaining employees is important in light of
outside factors: increased retirements, Great ese

Romareana

An audit of police overtime found
issues with vacancies in the Police
department.

ap BERKELEY CITY AUDITOR

ap BERKELEY Cify AUDITOR


----
Objectives, Scope, Methodology:

Objectives: Scope: Audit period of FY 2018 — FY 2022
1. How do staff shortages affect
city services? Methodology:

¢ Analyzed available employee data
¢ Satisfaction survey (current employees)
e Exit survey (former employees)

2. What is the state of employee
satisfaction?

3. Wiel internal factors affect the ¢ Interviewed all department directors
City’s ability to Till vacancies? ¢ Met with union representatives

4. How does telework affect the ¢ Reviewed best practices, data from other cities
City’s ability to retain
employees?

5. How does the City use data to
address staff shortages?

ap BERKELEY CITY AUDITOR

----
High Response Rate for Employee Surveys:

Satisfaction survey of 2,094 active employees: 771 responses (37%)

Exit survey of 495 former employees: 142 responses (29%)

ap BERKELEY CITY AUDITOR

----
What we found:

Finding 1: Staff shortages constrained city services.

Finding 2:S5ome surveyed employees reported dissatisfaction and
many have contemplated leaving.

Finding 3: Instability in Human Resources delayed hiring and
impacted internal services.

Finding 4: Telework can benefit the City but the current policy is
limited.

Finding 5: The City lacked reliable data to address staff shortages.

ap BERKELEY CITY AUDITOR


----
Berkeley’s high vacancy rate reflected staff shortages.

Berkeley had the second highest vacancy rate compared to other Bay Area cities in 2022.

City of Vallejo 28%

City of Berkeley [EI 19%
City of Oakland | 16%

City of Richmond | 16%
City of Hayward $e 15%
City of Concord Po 14%

City ofSan Jose 13%
City of Fremont | 11%

City of San Francisco [yy 9%

Source: City of Berkeley, City of San Francisco Human Resources, City of Oakland Human Resources. See page 7 of the report for more details.

ap BERKELEY CITY AUDITOR

----
Berkeley’s high vacancy rate reflected staff shortages.

The City did not hire
enough employees to
address the gap between
voluntary separations
(resignations and
retirements), and new
hires.

*Update: Hiring has exceeded
separations every month
since January 2023

Resignations and retirements outpaced full-time hires during the
audit period.

Resignations and Retirements

Full-Time Hires

16 74

06

FY 2018 FY 2019 FY 2020 FY 2021 FY 2022

Source: ERMA, FUND$, and NEOGOV. See page 8 of the report for more details.

lu BERKELEY CITY AUDITOR

----
staff shortages impaired services to the community and the City
lacked a clear retention strategy.

ry Staff shortages impacted city services.
= e Reduced services or hours of operation at clinics and senior centers.

¢ Temporary closures of some fire stations and increases in
mandatory overtime.

¢ Increased risk of overpayments, missed payments, or fraud.

eee The City also lacked a clear and data-driven retention strategy during the
W audit period.
¢ Lack of clarity around strategy to reach strategic plan goal to attract
and retain a talented and diverse city government workforce.

¢ No analysis of staffing levels for successful operations and services.

ap BERKELEY CITY AUDITOR


----
What we found:

Finding 1: Staff shortages constrained city services.

Finding 2: Some surveyed employees reported dissatisfaction
and many have contemplated leaving.

Finding 3: Instability in Human Resources delayed hiring and
impacted internal services.

Finding 4: Telework can benefit the City but the current policy is
limited.

Finding 5: The City lacked reliable data to address staff shortages.

ap BERKELEY CITY AUDITOR

----
»ome City of Berkeley employees reported low job satisfaction

and over half have contemplated leaving.

Surveyed City of Berkeley employees reported lower job
satisfaction than federal government employees in similar-
sized agencies.

Berkeley MDD DD A 55%
government PEE EE EE 3%

Source: 2022 City of Berkeley employee satisfaction survey and 2022 federal employee
viewpoint survey. See page 12 of the report for more details.

Over half of surveyed employees
reported looking for another job in the
prior year.

55% Of
surveyed
employees

looked for
another
job

Source: 2022 satisfaction survey. See page 12 of the report
for more details.

amp BERKELEY CITY AUDITOR


----
Employee dissatisfaction made it harder for the City to retain staff.

Current employees:
¢ Workloads

¢ Professional development opportunities

° Pay
¢ Communication and support from city leadership

Former employees:
¢ Organizational culture problems

¢ Poor work environment

e Retirement

¢ Poor relationship with supervisor

ap BERKELEY CITY AUDITOR


----
What we found:

Finding 1: Staff shortages constrained city services.

Finding 2:S5ome surveyed employees reported dissatisfaction and
many have contemplated leaving.

Finding 3: Instability in Human Resources delayed hiring and
impacted internal services.

Finding 4: Telework can benefit the City but the current policy is
limited.

Finding 5: The City lacked reliable data to address staff shortages.

ap BERKELEY CITY AUDITOR


----
There was instability in the HR department during the audit period.

Human Resources had the City’s highest vacancy rate in October 2022.
Human Resources | 45%

City Attorney

Finance

Health, Housing and Community Services
City Manager

Information Technology

Police

City Clerk

Office of the Director of Police Accountability
Berkeley Public Library

Planning

Public Works

Parks, Recreation, and Waterfront

City Auditor

Office of Economic Development

Mayor and Council

Fire

Rent Stabilization Board

8%

21%

20%
20%
20%
18%
16%
15%
15%
14%
13%
13%
11%

Source: Department directors. See page 25 of the report for more details.

35%
30%
25%
25%
¢ Vacancy rate: 45% vacancy rate in HR in 2022

¢ Tenure: 3.1 years in HR compared to citywide
average of 10.4 years.

¢ Turnover: 26 HR employees left out of 22
budgeted positions.

*Update: HR is now almost fully staffed

lu BERKELEY CITY AUDITOR

----
Instability in HR contributed to challenges in the City.

¢ Training compliance: City has been out of compliance since at least 2022.

¢ Performance evaluations: 67% of surveyed employees reported that they
did not receive a performance evaluation in the year prior.

¢ Exit surveys: 75% of surveyed former employees said they did not receive
an exit survey upon leaving their position.

ap BERKELEY CITY AUDITOR

----
The average time to hire increased by almost three months.

The average time to hire increased since fiscal year 2018.

74 a
6.3
|

FY 2018 FY 2019 FY 2020 FY 2021 FY 2022

Berkeley's Average Time to Hire in
Months

Source: NEOGOV. See page 24 of the report for more details.

lu BERKELEY CITY AUDITOR

----
Ineffective procedures may have contributed to challenges
with hiring and internal services.

¢ HR did not generally use modern hiring processes during the
audit period, and the management approval process was
inefficient.

¢ HR did not provide hiring managers with trainings on the
hiring process.

¢ Some employees reported inadequate onboarding.

ap BERKELEY CITY AUDITOR


----
What we found:

Finding 1: Staff shortages constrained city services.

Finding 2:S5ome surveyed employees reported dissatisfaction and
many have contemplated leaving.

Finding 3: Instability in Human Resources delayed hiring and
impacted internal services.

Finding 4: Telework can benefit the City but the current policy is
limited.

Finding 5: The City lacked reliable data to address staff shortages.

ap BERKELEY CITY AUDITOR


----
Most surveyed city employees reported being satisfied
with telework.

Sixty-four percent of teleworking employees Surveyed employees reported some

we surveyed were satisfied with their positive impacts of telework:

CAPENENES: a ¢ Decreased commute time
| am satisfied with my

teleworking experience. ¢ Improved job satisfaction

¢ Improved work-life balance

¢ Improved workplace safety

Neutral
21%

Source: 2022 satisfaction survey. See page 29 of
the report for more details.

ap BERKELEY CITY AUDITOR


----
Telework may have additional benefits to the City.

Telework can reduce the amount of CO2 produced by employee commutes.

-9/9
- 1,149
-1,724
Si (o
3,158
2,083

No telework  1dayperweek 2days per week 3 days per week

4,900
4,000
3,900
3,000
2,900
2,000
1,500
1,000

900

Annual CO2 Emissions (Metric Tons)

Telework Schedule

Source: Berkeley City Auditor analysis. See page 32 of the report for more details. an U BERKELEY CITY AUDITOR

----
The telework policy is not comprehensive and lacks accountability
elements.

The City of Berkeley does not have a comprehensive telework policy.

Elements of a Comprehensive Policy state ol Alameda
California County San Francisco Berkeley
The policy requires employees to be available for contact while / Y
teleworking.

The policy states that employees must comply with health and safety JS

requirements at their telework site.
The policy has specific eligibility guidance. v

The policy has clear communication guidelines and expectations. X

There is an accountability element for unresponsive employees.

There are training resources and requirements.

Supervisors must provide justification for denying telework requests. X

There are clear instructions for requesting equipment. [ om

Source: State of California telework guide, Alameda County telework policy, City and County

of San Francisco's teleworking policy, City of Berkeley telework policy. See page 35 of the lu BERKELEY CITY AUDITOR
report for more details.

----
What we found:

Finding 1: Staff shortages constrained city services.

Finding 2:S5ome surveyed employees reported dissatisfaction and
many have contemplated leaving.

Finding 3: Instability in Human Resources delayed hiring and
impacted internal services.

Finding 4: Telework can benefit the City but the current policy is
limited.

Finding 5: The City lacked reliable data to address staff
shortages.

ap BERKELEY CITY AUDITOR


----
The City did not have reliable data on trends in retention, employee
satisfaction, or diversity, equity, inclusion, and accessibility (DETA).

Key Retention Data Was Unreliable ¢ The City did not have reliable retention
Data Definition Status data.
Vacancy rate Percent of total positions | Unreliable ¢ The City did not consistently send out
that are vacant. exit surveys or collect satisfaction data.
Turnover rate Percent of employees to Unreliable ° Berkeley has not reported sufficient
leave an organization data to track progress towards its
during a given time diverse workforce goal and DEIA trends.
period.

Source: Auditor conclusion. See page 36 of the report for more details.

ap BERKELEY CITY AUDITOR

----
We recommend that the City:

Establish retention goals, conduct an analysis of staff needed
for city services and consider staff capacity around new
legislation.

Take steps to address employee satisfaction and improve the
recruiting and hiring process.

Expand the telework policy to align with best practices.

Regularly collect data on employee satisfaction and on
diversity, equity, inclusion, and accessibility.

BERKELEY CIty AUDITOR

----
City management and Human Resources agreed
with our audit findings, conclusions, and
recommendations, and provided an action plan to
address our recommendations.

BERKELEY CIty AUDITOR


----
Examples of management progress on addressing staff shortages:
Ce ¢ Hired twice as many new employees as the number who left the City in 2023.
@ @
Lael e Filled vacancies and increased staff capacity in HR.

+= ¢ Currently developing new trainings and hiring procedures.
J -_

amp BERKELEY CITY AUDITOR


----
We would like to thank city management and
Human Resources for their cooperation with this
audit.

We would also like to thank the employees and
department directors who provided their
perspectives through survey responses and
interviews.

ap BERKELEY CITY AUDITOR


----
184

City Manager’s Comments on Audit Report
“Staff Shortages:

City Services Constrained by Staff Retention
Challenges and Delayed Hiring”

July 11, 2023

----
CONTEXT - EMPLOYEE

RECRUITMENT & RETENTION

Employee recruitment and retention have always been high priorities for the City.
We are emerging from a global pandemic, which has had significant impacts on the way we work.

Public agencies around us are also grappling with maintaining a stable workforce in a highly
competitive labor market.

We are in an environment where recruitment and retention efforts must be the City’s top priority.
To that end - on December 13, 2022, the City Manager provided a report on the Staffing Crisis.

This report analyzed data from 2020-2022 and focused on the impacts of hiring as a result of the
global pandemic and the Great Resignation.

----
CONTEXT - EMPLOYEE

RECRUITMENT & RETENTION

The City Manager initiated a

comprehensive effort last September
The goal: Become an Employer of Choice

A thorough workplace assessment
produced a “Roadmap”

An actionable plan of projects and tasks
pointed on enhancing work culture and
effectively attracting talent

Cathy Capriola (She/Her) - 1st
Retired City Manager / Management Consultant
4d-@®

So proud of the "Employer of Choice Roadmap" our
MRG Team (me, Craig Whittom, Marcie Scott) did in
collaboration with the City of Berkeley. An actionable
plan that Berkeley is driving forward with strike teams,
new communication, and rolling prioritized initiatives.
Great work Dee Williams-Ridley, LaTanya Bellow, Anne
Cardwell, and the project manager Tasha Tervalon!

Mary Egan: ist
© CEO and Managing Partner of MRG, LLC (formerly

Municipal Resource Group).
4d-®

This EMPLOYER OF CHOICE “Roadmap” Case Study
for the City of Berkeley signifies a pro-active shift
from the typical model of organizational assessment.
The “Roadmap” delivery arranges data & tasks to
streamline resources and mobilize change. Diagnostic
assessments yielded recommended activities now
arranged to focus on strike teams and actions. Read
more on MRG's Linkedin page.

#localgov #localgovernment #hiring #recruitment
#employeeretention #workplaceculture
#successionplanning #upskilling

----
CONTEXT - EMPLOYEE

RECRUITMENT & RETENTION

¢ In early 2023, the final roadmap for the Employer of Choice Initiative (EOCI) was presented to
the City Council

pea TRAINING &
RECRUITING RETAINING COMMUNICATION PROFESSIONAL HEALTH, SAFETY ELEVATE INTERNAL
FOR TALENT OUR EMPLOYEES & EMPLOYEE DEVELOPMENT & WELLNESS PROCESSES
ENGAGEMENT

Sc ce en Ce ony

¢ With the Council’s full support - the City has already taken several key steps:
¢ Allocating additional staff to Human Resources to support recruitment efforts
¢ Making intentional efforts to enhance internal and external communications (e.g.,

increased presence on key social media sites, RFP for recruitment & marketing agency)
e Reviewing and updating antiquated business processes

----
CONTEXT - EMPLOYEE

RECRUITMENT & RETENTION

¢ The City is seeing the positive results of these initial efforts — an average 2:1 ratio of hiring

over attrition thus far in 2023.

HIRING OVER ATTRITION

bruar

y March April May June
@ Hires

m@ Separations

¢ The recently-released findings of the City Auditor affirm the goals already established by EOCI
and align well with efforts already underway. 5

----
SUMMARY

EOCI & AUDIT

The audit lays out 25 audit findings and recommendations related to the City’s staffing shortages based on
information gathered between 2018-2022.

Fortunately, the majority of the 25 findings/recommendations align well with the 49 recommendations outlined
on the EOCI roadmap:

Audit Recommendations Number of Recommendations

Recommendations aligned w/ EOCI & already underway 14
Aligned w/ EOCI but not yet underway 7
Other 4

Recommendations that are already underway and/or clearly aligned with the EOCI Roadmap will take priority in
terms of resources and timing — many of these efforts will take significant time & resources.

Reports to City Council will be structured to eliminate redundancy and thus EOCI & Audit Findings will be
combined and reported out jointly.

The following slides provide a more detailed side-by-side comparison of all the recommendations...

----
Audit Recommendations EOCI Recommendations

1.1 — Better manage retention

1.2 — Staffing analysis

2.1 —Job descriptions

2.2 — Council referrals/staff capacity

2.3 - Status of projects to Council

2.4 - Improve pathways for promotion

2.5 - Annual performance evaluation

2.6 - Comprehensive training program

2.7 —- Complete/Report mandatory trainings
2.8 — Update on hard to fill positions

2.9 — Reassess pay for hard to fill positions
2.10 — Employee communications

3.1 — Prioritize recruitment & hiring needs
3.2 - Assess the approval process for hiring

3.3 — Recruitment & social media

1.12 - Workforce analysis report

N/A

1.14 - Update key job classifications

2.8 - Focus priorities & initiatives by Council

N/A

4.2 - Learning academies & specialized training
2.4 - Performance evaluation and feedback

4.1 - Training strategy & plan for learning culture
4.1 - Training strategy & plan for learning culture
1.2 - Streamline recruitment — strike team

N/A

3.1 - Invest in internal communication

1.3 - Act as business partners with departments
1.2 - Streamline recruitment — strike team

1.6 - Utilize social media

----
Audit Recommendations EOCI Recommendations

3.4 — NeoGov procedures & training 1.13 - Training/User guides For ERMA & NEOGOV
3.5 — Improve onboarding process 2.1 - Overhaul onboarding program

4.1 - Identify ways of reducing unused space N/A
in city buildings

4.2 - Improve the telework policy 4.6 -Develop hybrid management training
5.1 - Clean up personnel data in ERMA 1.11 - HR performance metrics & reporting

5.2 - Develop procedures for entering and 1.13 — Training/User guides For ERMA & NEOGOV
managing personnel data in ERMA

5.3 — Produce HR reports — vacancies/hiring 1.12 - Workforce analysis report - annual
5.4 - Conduct exit surveys or interviews 2.5 - Upgrade exit interview process
5.5 - Collect data on employee satisfaction 3.5 - Link to new DEI Program

5.6 - Produce Year End Workforce Reports 1.12 - Workforce analysis report - annual
on demographic workforce trends at least
annually

----
STAFF ENGAGEMENT & INPUT


----
o
LOOKING FORWARD

¢ The findings of the audit are supporting the commitment of the City’s
current EOCI efforts.

¢ The EOCI Roadmap has many key destinations along the way to becoming
an Employer of Choice.

¢ We welcome the additional insights offered by the audit, which help to
affirm we have crafted an effective itinerary for this journey.

¢ Key to our continued success along the way will be maintaining the
Employer of Choice Initiative as the organization’s top priority.

----
o
In Closing...

¢ Thank you to the City Auditor, City Council and City Employees

¢ It will take continued support, trust and patience to effectively
navigate these changes together

¢ For the latest on EOCI efforts: June 2023 City of Berkeley Employer of
Choice Newsletter.pdf

----
185

_ Benado, Tony

From: Derethia DuVal <derethia@outlook.com>
Sent: Tuesday, July 11, 2023 5:51 PM

To: All Council

Subject: Affordable Housing Preference Policy

WARNING: This is not a City of Berkeley email. Do not click links or attachments unless you trust the
sender and know the content is safe.

- Dear Berkeley City Council Members and the Honorable Mayor Arreguin

| am writing this comment as a long time South Berkeley homeowner. Since my family has lived
in Berkeley we have seen the our neighborhood change from a lovable working class neighborhood
to an area so upscale as the homes are over a million dollars, that the neighborhood has no more
children. Because working people with children can’t afford it. We are pained to be in the middle of
the mass displacement of the working class, low income, moderate income and Black and other
people of color being ejected from their home and out of Berkeley because of NO affordable options.
Between 2005 and 2019 Black Berkeley residents decreased by 21%, a higher rate than other ethnic
and low income groups. Given the over 75 year history of the Black community living in Berkeley it
hurts my heart to loose long many time neighbors and friends. With over 55% of rented households
are rent burdened by 2019 statistics and 74% ot Black Berkery residents are renters. What has
happen to our town?

The Affordable Housing Preference Policy is a viable strategy to interrupt the unprecedented mass
displacement of Black, Brown, working class, low wage.and very low income citizens. The policy will
center and prioritize the needs of Berkeley’s most vulnerable and displaced community members.
The Berkeley | moved into over 35 years ago was a City that practiced and professed to believe
housing was a human right and its citizens deserved a City that respected their humanity not being
treated as a commodity. .

With Respect
Dr. Derethia DuVal

Sent from my iPad

----
186

Benado, Tony | |
|

From: . Linda Currie <info@transitionberkeley.org>

Sent: ) Monday, July 10, 2023 1:13 PM

To: All Council; Manager, C; Berkeley Mayor's Office

Subject: Restore Strawberry Creek! Item #33 - Civic Center Phase II - Design Concept Adoption

Attachments: Item #3-Restore Strawberry Crk-TransitionBerkeley(2023-7-9).docx.pdf

WARNING: This is not a City of Berkeley email. Do not click links or attachments unless you trust the sender and know the content is
safe.

July 10, 2023
Re: Restore Strawberry Creek! Item #33 - Civic Center Phase II - Design Concept Adoption

‘Dear Honorable Mayor & City Council Members,

Our organization has been working to restore habitat by planting pollinator gardens in Berkeley Parks including Strawberry Creek
Park. From our work in the park, we have witnessed first hand how the daylighted section of Strawberry Creek brings about so
much vibrancy and life to the park and community. Children gleefully flock to it, while parents relax and picnic nearby. Birds flutter.
about splashing in the creek, while iridescent dragonflies hover before dipping down for a drink.

- The successful daylighting of the creek in Strawberry Creek Park decades ago did not happen without concerns. City officials were
apprehensive about the project (ex. feasibility, cost, flooding, safety issues, trash, crime etc)(1), but somehow the community vision
prevailed. Visit the park and creek today and you'll be stunned by its natural beauty and popularity.

Daylighting creeks can offer transformational change to urban areas (2) and is a direct way to connect with nature, supports
biodiversity, honors indigenous land and rights of nature (3), offers educational opportunities, can bring in revitalization and
revenue, to name a few of the many benefits.

‘N
On July 11, 2023 you will have the opportunity to consider the approval of the Civic Center Plan.

The daylighting of Strawberry Creek in Civic Center Park is one of the most important elements of the Plan that we are asking you
to fully support.

We ask that the proposed Design for the creek not assume any limitations on the location and flow of the creek at this early stage
in the planning process. The Civic Center Design Concept describes the daylighting of the Creek with an "alternate scenario" using
the term “partial flow creek bed”.

A full planning and design study would give you a better sense of what’s possible and would be more likely to secure funding.

Therefore, Transition Berkeley asks you to change the description of the "alternate design", from just a "partial flow" to supporting a
full flow restoration of Strawberry Creek in Civic Center Park. We believe It can be done while still supporting the other important
park uses and activities.

We’ve experienced the success of daylighting the creek in Strawberry Creek Park and know that many other cities have enjoyed the
benefits of daylighting creeks in their downtown urban settings (2).

Let’s stay open to the possibility of daylighting the creek in Civic Center Park, while allowing full planning and design studies to
proceed.

Warm regards,

----
Members of the Board
Transition Berkeley

Email: info@ TransitionBerkeley.org

(1) Creek Daylighting FAQ, SF Public Utilities Commission, Case Study, Strawberry Creek Park, Berkeley

(2) How ‘Daylighting’ Buried Waterways Is Revitalizing Cities Across America, Smithsonian Magazine, March 15 2023, author Jim Morrison
(3) What are the Rights of Nature? Global Alliance of Rights of Nature

----
:  Eringing community togecher to build a more
Transition equitable, regenerative, and sell-reliant future

Berkeley for Berkeley. our, trams itlionkerkebey ore

July 10, 2023
Re: Restore Strawberry Creek! item #33 - Civic Center Phase II - Design Concept Adoption

Dear Honorable Mayor & City Council Members,

Our organization has been working to restore habitat by planting pollinator gardens in Berkeley Parks
including Strawberry Creek Park. From our work in the park, we have witnessed first hand how the
daylighted section of Strawberry Creek brings about so much vibrancy and life to the park and
community. Children gleefully flock to it, while parents relax and picnic nearby. Birds flutter about
splashing in the creek, while iridescent dragonflies hover before dipping down for a drink.

The successful daylighting of the creek in Strawberry Creek Park decades ago did not happen without
concerns. City officials were apprehensive about the project (ex. feasibility, cost, flooding, safety issues,
trash, crime etc)(1), but somehow the community vision prevailed. Visit the park and creek today and
you'll be stunned by its natural beauty and popularity.

Daylighting creeks can offer transformational change to urban areas (2) and is a direct way ta connect with
nature, supports biodiversity, honors indigenous land and rights of nature (3), offers educational
opportunities, can bring in revitalization and revenue, to name a few of the many benefits.

On July 11, 2023 you will have the opportunity to consider the approval of the Civic Center Plan.

The daylighting of Strawberry Creek in Civic Center Park is one of the most important elements of the
Plan that we are asking you to fully. support.

We ask that the proposed Design for the creek not assume any limitations on the location and flow of
the creek at this early stage in the planning process. The Civic Center Design Concept describes the
daylighting of the Creek with an “alternate scenario" using the term “partial flow creek bed”.

A full planning and design study would give you a better sense of what’s possible and would be more
likely to secure funding.

Therefore, Transition Berkeley asks you to change the description of the "alternate design", from just a
"partial flow" to supporting a full flow restoration of Strawberry Creek in Civic Center Park. We believe It
can be done while still supporting the other important park uses and activities.

We've experienced the success of daylighting the creek in Strawberry Creek Park and know that many
other cities have enjoyed the benefits of daylighting creeks in their downtown urban settings (2).

Let’s stay open to the possibility of daylighting the creek in Civic Center Park, while allowing full
planning and design studies to proceed.

Warm regards,

Members of the Board
Transition Berkeley

Email: info@TransitionBerkeley.org

(1) Creek Daylighting FAQ, SF Public Utilities Commission, Case Study, Strawberry Creek Park, Berkeley

(2) How ‘Daylighting’ Buried Waterways Is Revitalizing Cities Across America, Smithsonian Magazine, March 15 2023,
author Jim Morrison

(3) What are the Rights of Nature? Global Alliance of Rights of Nature

----
187

Benado, Tony

From: Beth Lamont <bethlamont1@gmail.com>
Sent: Monday, July 10, 2023 12:39 PM
To: All Council
Subject: Item #33 - Adoption - Civic Center Phase II - Design Concept

WARNING: This is not a City of Berkeley email. Do not click links or attachments unless you trust the sender and know the content is
safe.
To the Berkeley City Council:

Please support a *full flow restoration* of Strawberry Creek in Civic Center Park. It can be done while still supporting
other identified park uses and activities. And it would be an significant, beautiful, educational asset for the city including
both residents and visitors.

Sincerely,

Beth Lamont
2253 Glen Avenue
Berkeley, CA

----
Benado, Tony |

From: . Diane Ross-Leech <dianeleech@comcast.net>

Sent: Monday, July 10, 2023 8:28 PM

To: All Council ©

Ce: _ Diane Ross-Leech .

Subject: . Item #33 - Adoption - Civic Center Phase II - Design Concept

WARNING: This is not a City of Berkeley email. Do not click links or attachments unless you trust the sender and know the content is
safe.

Please support a full flow restoration of Strawberry Creek in Civic Center Park. It can be done while still -

supporting other identified park uses and activities.

Thank you,

Diane Ross-Leech
Berkeley Resident
1644 Addison Street

----
189

Benado, Tony
ee ieee

From: kelly hammargren <kellyhammargren@gmail.com>
Sent: Monday, July 10, 2023 11:33 PM

To: . All Council

Subject: , ) Civic Center Plan

WARNING: This is not a City of Berkeley email. Do not click links or attachments unless you trust the sender and know the content is
safe.

Dear Mayor and Council,

I've spent considerable time out in our city parks over the last few weeks and this is what | heard from children
-and their parents. First of all Strawberry Creek Park was the most popular and most highly utilized of the parks
visited. Children love the creek. Their parents told me how their children want to come to the creek to play.
And play they did. .

| was surprised with the number of people from neighboring cities who visit Berkeley City Parks and again,
visitors from other cities, chose Strawberry Creek in much higher numbers. Besides the creek and play area,
the cafe was a big draw for visitors.

My experience of observing and listening matched the reports, studies and articles, | found online under the
search "community impact of daylighting creeks". Daylighting creeks has an enormously positive impact on
attracting people, especially families with children. More than that daylighting creeks brings economic
benefits, restores habitat and ecosystems, and is listed under actions for resilient cities,

Please support the alternative design and change the ' ‘partial flow" to support a full flow restoration of
Strawberry Creek in Civic Center Park.

kelly hammargren

----
190

Benado, Tony . |
From: ) Tom Kelly <tkelly@kyotousa.org>

Sent: Monday, July 10, 2023 4:46 PM

To: . _ All Council

Cc: . Garland, Liam; Susi Marzuola; Melendez, Nancy; Kapfer, Elmar; Hollander, Eleanor
Subject: Support comments for daylighting Strawberry Creek

Attachments: RSC Online Petition (7.10.23).pdf’

WARNING: This is not a City of Berkeley email. Do not click links or attachments unless you trust the sender and know the content is
safe.

Dear Mayor Arreguin and Members of the City Council,

Volunteers at Restore Strawberry Creek! polled Berkeley residents and park users and found
overwhelming enthusiasm for daylighting Strawberry Creek in Civic Center Park. Please take a
moment to review the responses and comments to see just how excited people are about
opening up the creek in the heart of the City.

And as a reminder, Restore Strawberry Creek! is actively seeking the funding necessary to
make the daylighting a reality and ask for a simple, but formal, acknowledgement that the Plan
would allow for a “full flow” restoration of Strawberry Creek. As we have demonstrated in
previous correspondence, a full flow restoration would allow for many, if not most, activities
considered in the Plan. Describing the daylighted creek as a “partial flow” restoration as the
Plan now states, could hamper our ability to attract state funding.

Sincerely,

Tom Kelly
Restore Strawberry Creek!

----
ONLINE PETITION

Restore Strawberry Creek! has conducted outreach to identify support for daylighting Strawberry Creek
in Civic Center Park via online and paper petitions. Below are the results for the online petition. Results
for paper petition are reported separately.

247 paper signatures
_45 online
292 TOTAL signatures

The online petition can be viewed at this URL: https://forms.gle/Ayrfu ndnklfpVJAU8

The 4 questions and their results (n=45):

e Are you a Berkeley resident?
e Results: 836% Yes, 12% No, but visit Berkeley parks, 2% other

¢ Do you support restoring Strawberry creek in Civic Center Park downtown?

. e Results: 100% Yes!

e Do you think young people should have access to creeks and nature in our cities?
e Results: 100% Yes, absolutely! ,

e Why do you support daylighting Strawberry Creek in Civic Center Park?
e See below for list |

Are you a Berkeley resident? Do you support restoring Strawberry Creek in Civic Center Park?

@ Yes! | live in Berkeley ‘> No (but | live in the area and enjoy Berkeley's parks) No (all other) . ‘> Yes! (Please tell us why, below)

Do you think young people should have access to creeks
and nature in our cities?

) Yes, absolutely!

WRITTEN COMMENT

pages, Cf aan! Pests of Online

----
“I love nature, daylighting the creek would be a great asset for the downtown” — Kelly —

“Daylighting other areas of the Creek (Strawberry Creek Park) has been very successful,
beautifying and enlivening the Park and restoring natural habitat to that area. The same could
be possible with Civic Center Park.”-— Bonnie —

“To increase the health of our watershed, give all people access to a beautiful creek, and
increase biodiversity” — Chase

“As stewards, we should have a relationship to our water and watersheds. this could create
many more opportunities!’— William .

“Strawberry Creek Park is our favorite Berkeley park. We like to watch the creek play over the
rocks and we love to see children enjoying it. So we'd love to see the same creek appear in
Downtown Berkeley.” — Nancy

“It will create biodiversity, attract visitors and children and honor indigenous people.” — Sylvia
“Biodiversity, open space, habitat. ”— Tom and Jane

“Creeks should not have been buried to begin with. Our ecosystems have been severely
impacted and efforts to restore full creek flow on the surface are honestly imperative. Creeks

. draw everyone to their side as it is in the DNA of homo sapiens to respond positively to the flow
of water." — Elizabeth

“A creek buried underground does not support the habitat that would thrive around it were it
opened to the sky. Things die when they enter the dark/dead zone.” — Kathleen

“It would be a great amenity to city residents, encourage people to appreciate creeks and offer
opportunities for Berkeley High and other young people to get involved.” — Dale

“4 will make the park (and the city) more enjoyable and beautiful.” — Jeff

“We need to daylight Strawberry Creek in Civic Center Park. The creek was the primary water
source for key parts of Berkeley. The history and development of Berkeley is closely linked with
Strawberry Creek. It should no longer be hidden. It should rightfully be daylighted and
celebrated in the primary civic heart of our city." — Mukul

“Enhances the downtown area, provides green space for people to enjoy, piemaee habitat for
wildlife." — Margot ;

“An environmentally and culturally positive action that will bring joy and delight to our
community.” ~ Miranda:

“The open, flowing creek will add a cool, natural presence that makes the park an exceptional
place people will want to come to. And it will symbolize our City's ecological values.” — Stephen

“Daylighting the creek in Civic Center Park will greatly improve our ability to physically reconnect
with what is essential in all of our lives: water. A place in the center of Berkeley where we can
enjoy watching and listening to a fully flowing creek will greatly enhance our sense of well-being
both as individuals, and as members of a thriving community. Just think of the many species of

festors steawberry Craak! Results af Online Parton

----
birds and butterflies that will be flying near the flowing creek. Families and folks of all ages and
eapenionoes will benefit. Such joy!” — Sally

“t will add some beautiful space to an otherwise increasingly anti-human environment” — Bernard
“The daylit parts of the creek in the UC campus look great and immensely adds to the quality of
campus experience. | think if we could daylight creeks all the way fo the bay, it would look great
and immensely add to the quality of life in Berkeley. ”— Alan

“It would enhance the park tremendously” — Sheila

“Will increase species diversity and science education.” — |rene

‘It's a shame it was buried in the first place! Let's restore Berkeley's natural beauty, and provide
a resource for people and wildlife alike.” — Molly

‘Creeks are beautiful, they support life, and may help prevent building and flooding problems in
the long run." — Mary Lynn

“There is no better design for a city than to allow its natural waterways. As Berkeley packs in
more residents, we also need a bit of real nature." — Carolyn

“For environmental restoration and climate change resilience; for a vibrant community center,
which celebrates nature and well-being; for economic resilience, bringing a much-needed
anchor and draw to the downtown core; to provide a place where all people, of any age or
demographic, can come together and enjoy nature and art and history around our diverse local
and regional cultures." ~ Juliet

“As development continues there are so few places where students and residents can enjoy
what nature offers. This is particularly true in Berkeley where things are so built up.” — Mary

“The natural flow of Strawberry Creek through Civic Center Park would be a welcome addition
to the small park and provide an opportunity for Berkeley High School students to study a creek
very close by."—Helga -

“For beauty, for health, for biodiversity, for education, for restoration of the natural environment."
- — Summer

“It would be beneficial for all." — Pierre |

“Nature” — Mike

“It will reinvigorate the park and connect the urban environment to nature.” — Sas

‘It's the right thing to do; preserving the past is a good thing.” — Michael

‘It's increasingly important for cities to preserve elements of nature for the benefit of their
inhabitants. Research has demonstrated unequivocally that humans need contact with our
natural world for both physical, mental, and emotional health. Flowing water supports a diversity

of birds and beneficial insects and is a soothing element in a park.” — Charlene

“It would may the area more inviting.” — Imtiaz

----
191

Benado, Tony.

From: Kathleen Giustino <kathleeng@a1suninc.net>
Sent: . Tuesday, July 11, 2023 10:39 AM

To: All Council

Subject: . Full Flow Restoration of Strawberry Creek

WARNING: This is not a City of Berkeley email. Do not click links or attachments unless you trust the sender and know the content is
safe.
| have contacted my City Council multiple times to fully support the restoration of Strawberry Creek and all
water flowing from the Berkeley Hills to the Bay. Clean water being filtered by sunlight will make humans, fish
and other wildlife migrating down the corridors healthier and, hopefully, happier. Full flow restoration makes _
sense. Do this work completely and well.

Thank you,

Kathleen Giustino
2015 Yolo Avenue

Kathleen Giustino
CFO, Ai Sun, Inc.

kathleeng@aisuninc.com
office: (510) 526-5715 ext 6
http://www.alsuninc.com


----
192

Benado, Tony | |
SS i

From: Erin Diehm <erindiehm@hotmail.com>

Sent: Tuesday, July 11, 2023 3:37 PM

To: All Council os

Ce: City Clerk; Garland, Liam; Susi Marzuola; Hollander, Eleanor

Subject: 247 petition signatures supporting full exploration of daylighting Strawberry Creek -
Council July 11 Item #33

Attachments: _ Strawberry Creek Paper Petition Responses 1-247.pdf

WARNING: This is not a City of Berkeley email. Do not click links or attachments unless you trust the sender and know the content is
safe.

Dear Honorable Mayor and Berkeley Councilmembers,

The support for daylighting Strawberry Creek in Civic Center Park is strong. Please see the attached 247
signatures asking the Berkeley City Council to:

"SU pport a full exploration of daylighting Strawberry Creek in Civic Center Park"

Limiting the creek to just a "partial flow" could interfere with grant opportunities. We ask that language be
added in the Motion tonight to allow for a full exploration of restoring the creek, to include a potential “full

flow design”. Please help us identify a design that can support the many important current (and future) uses
of the park while also adding the magic and appeal of a real, natural creek.

Youth love the idea of the creek! And so do parents!

COMMENTS from YOUTH

“Great creek to hang around! Got lots of friends that also like it.” — Ezekiel (13 yrs old)

“I'm young and | like creeks.” —Jennica
“{11 yrs old]" — Bonnie (11 yrs old)

“| like the creek” — Quinny (11 yrs old)

“| like the creek” — Crosby (9 yrs old)

“| [heart] creek” — Elijah (9 yrs old)

“(8 year)” — Marci (8 yrs old). -

pr er en ne ee nn enn nnn ee

ADDITIONAL SELECTED COMMENTS

----
“This would greatly improve the quality of life of people who could visit the park and will be amazing for the
environment” — Ana Clara

“My children love the creek” — Becca

“| love Strawberry Creek and think Berkeley would be much nicer to restore it in Civic Center” —Tobias -
“Creeks are cool, nature is healing! Let's get them everywhere! [heart]” — Cassandra

“ think it's a good idea to open another creek. Hope to see that. ” — Rubee

“As a bay swimmer | believe daylighting our creeks is critical for the health of our bay ecosystem” — Helen
“Cree the creek!!” —Shaila

“Kids love the creek!” —Tom

“Strawberry Creek is one of my child's favorite place” — Riley

“The creek is beautiful and deserves to see the light of day!” — Zachary

REMAINING COMMENTS
“Great place” — Rhonda
“More green space open to the public” -Ga briella
“Love creeks!” — Bianca
“Creeks are cool! [heart]” — Melanie
“Creeks and nature the best” — Nicholas
“More creeks ya'll!” — Craig
“all for nature” - Anana.
| “That would he fantastic” - Po Shu
“Please daylight Strawberry Creek!” — George
“| like creeks!” — Billy
“Support native habitats” - Derek
“Rivers transform green spaces and make them inviting” — Citlalli
“Berkeley can benefit from more open spaces.” — Elli

“It's a cool and good idea.” - Sandhya

----
“Let's make it happen.” — Luis
“Hook it up.” — Josh

“| heart & adore creeks!” —-Emma
“| grew up with creeks.” — Jacob
“Thanks” —Hand

“Thank you!!” — Gary

“:-)” — Betsy -

“Thanks” — Priyan

“Thanks!” — Kathleen

-“Theart] creeks!” — Mackenzie
“-)” — Kyle

“Restore the creek!!” —\kram
“Good idea” — Allan

“Restore the creek” — Damont
“Free the creek” —Teresa

“Free the creek” —Tania

“I love this creek!” — Sahil
“Love the creek” — Neevaj —
“Creek life!” — Shivani

“free the creek!” _Tianna
“Keep the creek!” — Kesha
“Love the creek [heart]” —Tina
“More creek!” — Jayme
“[heart] creek!” —Vanessa
“Love creek” — David

“the creek is the best!” — Kesha

“Love nature!” — Emily

----
“save the creek” — Fizza

“keep the creek” ~ Etsegenet

“| wholeheartedly support!” — Kira

“Would love to have a study done!” —Cyrina
“Sounds Beautiful :-)” — Angela

“sounds great” — Vladimirov

“We need creeks & parks!” — Bri

“love creeks!” — Namita

“[heart]” — Oliver

“Creek!” — Pei

“Yeah!” —Yida

“Restore nature! !” — Olivia

“Berkeley proud” — Travis

“We love the creek!” - Ben

“more park, less road is good” —Tvetene
“Yess!” — Erin

“Please restore the nature” — Jonathan

“Please do” — Genie

“All for removing parking & expanding green space” - Alice
, “Es muy interazante [unintel] projecto” ~ George
“| think all the creek should be restored” — Ruby
“Nature is beautiful :)” — Rohan

“Good luck!” —Sheenath — -

“Good luck!” — Mamasi

“Best of luck!!” — Mallika

Thank you for your service.

----
Best regards,
Erin

----
DAYLIGHT STRAWBERRY CREEK in CIVIC CENTER PARK : ]

Strawberry Creek in Strawberry Creek Park used to be under ground in a concrete culvert (tunnel). Removing
the culvert and restoring the creek ta its natural state above ground open to air and light is called daylighting.
On July 11, City Council will be voting on the Civic Center Plan including whether or not to fully explore
daylighting Strawberry Creek in the Civic Center Park. There is State of California grant money available for |
daylighting creeks through The Urban Creeks Restoration and Flood Control Act of 1984. |

Background

|
ACTION Ask City. Council to support a full exploration of daylighting Strawberry Creek in the Civic Center Park | .

| Print NAME . SIGNATURE COMMENT

| us rol a “3 ge Me oe

_ nia : = me on.

. / a ne

| a eo \ lor an a | : st g_gines eo a | |

: ———r mo tcrarcen rs
a I - :
"I ~
' Os ¢ ; LL !
ae i : 4 > ! ;
| ~ atte | { {
eeneneeeees eee — ee
1 i i
a Se » ot {
Loecstian st nt Signat ate Garrering : Date
“ a ‘ ae fee cc fr —_ i ef aro s , : : a erg eS ~ > + Be }<>
Spree pe Oly Cre de Perk, eo 8 POSS A feels

----
DAYLIGHT STRAWBERRY CREEK in CIVIC CENTER PARK 2
Background | Str aviary Creek in Strawberry Creek Park used ta be under ground in a concrete culvert (tunnel). Removing —
And the culvert and restoring the creek to its natural state above ground open to air and light is called daylighting.
Summary | On July 11, City Council will be voting on the Civic Center Plan including whether or not to fully explore
daylighting Strawberry Creek in the Civic Center Park. There is State of California grant money available for
daylighting creeks through The Urban Creeks Restoration and Flood Controi Act of 1984.
ACTION | Ask City Council to support a full exploration of daylighting Strawberry Creek in the Civic Center: Park
Print NAME / SIGNATURE . COMMENT
aL. = Ty 19 ww ouled reent | = pie Le
Ane Clay, Naat Of vA of 3 2eeP? p " ne Call forite

% ou wt Ls ‘int {ie

—- | Al ae
| \ pyle SLD ‘

ey als sacl.

| teeta

Lica Gantt

----
DAYLIGHT STRAWBERRY CREEK in CIVIC CENTER PARK | 4

| Background Strawberry Cr eek in in Strawber ry Creek Park used to be under ground in a concrete culvert (tunnel). Removing
| And _| the culvert and restoring the creek to its natural state above ground open to air and light is called daylighting.
Summary | On July 11, City Council will be voting on the Civic Center Plan including whether or not to fully explore
daylighting Strawberry Creek in the Civic Center Park. There is State of California grant money available for
daylighting creeks through The Urban Creeks Restoration and Flood Control Act of 1984.
Ask City Council to support.a full exploration of daylighting Strawberry Creek in the Civic Center Park

| Print NAME | SIGNATURE | COMMENT

|
4 Ata 4 . j am -_ a }
Wie Heyy e Bung ane / hed . | Vreeks are cue]!
. |
i i
ANERRY Callen a at |
Sennen ny, |
i ‘ ;
nee thy be\
Le-itian : at Signatiuae asheriog “* ~ re, z ay . OO Date —_ “
iat qature Cathe ng Ss eins heawry , Cake Peete ; F) {2 | 23

----
DAYLIGHT STRAWBERRY CREEK in CIVIC CENTER PARK | 4

Background | Strawberry Creek in Strawberry Creek Park used to be under ground in a concrete culvert (tunnel). Removing
And the culvert and restoring the creek to its natural state above ground open to air and light is called daylighting.
Summary | On July 11, City Council will be voting on the Civic Center Plan including whether or not to fully explore
| daylighting Strawberry Creek in the Civic Center Park. There is State of California grant money available for
| daylighting creeks through The Urban Creeks Restoration and Flood Control Act of 1924.

ACTION =| Ask City Council to: support a full exploration of daylighting Strawberry Creek in the Civic Center Park
Print NAME SIGNATURE | COMMENT
7 : . : « ~ is - pe a =< “vn \ ;
7 7 ae VN YS 1 ) C . , | iM] nt & C é at fh ae
- i {
P nS (hein 7 SHE a an _ |

Can i nn ae:
—te tive ily PrL ee he Ss
j - Poa ome.

las

Je reruila

_ feo —
7 4 Bey LALA CA si Geel LAA at
bey
: Ss ‘ i

é “xt (To Inc ANS Ne chive!
s , cok ints 2 Piegnd + +AAt olSo

; , ‘ o + ez 1

ry) cau 1" aay \ CML

| Fo Shu (aw

Location of Signuture Gathering -

y Krew Lae a

----
DAYLIGHT STRAWBERRY CREEK in CIVIC CENTER PARK S

Background | Strawberry Creek In Strawberry Creek Park used to be under ground jn a concrete culvert (tunnel). Removing
And the culvert and restoring the creek to its natural state above ground open to air and light is called daylighting.
On July 11, City Council will be voting on the Civic Center Plan including whether or not to fully explore
daylighting Strawberry Creek in the Civic Center Park. There is State of California grant money available for
daylighting creeks through The Urban Creeks Restoration and Flood Contro! Act of 1984.
ACTION | Ask City Council to support a full exploration of daylighting Strawberry Creek in-the Civic Center Park
Print NAME | SIGNATURE COMMENT

= ea |
oe | 7 | = tt .
-T wat t hog Owe of va
bo * . < if = ~ ~ < Bg Od are ba i
be Aa YO wT oe A ee |
i a ae 7 ™ t
| a ~ ~
. ie mo ms « i
One! a as Wi Teele 2S |
\ roe 0 we | wey a ce —e Col
om _— ae x .
Sm Tres a? 3
= or ner a
7 —_ _ - as
: ‘i r oe * e a _ "
| a a a “, oa ee a gt” a a:
j L SO Me oe ered + : a Fonte Lo ee ye
_ ee fo fen ao

| ALS4kO throne Kelly -


----
DAYLIGHT STRAWBERRY CREEK in CIVIC CENTER PARK | 6

Background | Strawberry Creek in Strawberry Creek Park used to.be under ground in a concrete culvert (cunnel). Removing

| And the culvert and restoring the creek to its natural state above ground open to air and light is called daylighting.
, Summary | On July 11, City Council will be voting on the Civic Center Plan including whether or not to fully explore
| daylighting Strawberry Creek in the Civic Center Park. There is State of California grant money available for

daylighting creeks through The Urban Creeks Restoration and Flood Control Act of 1984. _
ACTION Ask City Council to'support a full exploration of daylighting Strawberry Creek in the Civic.Center Park

Print NAME | SIGNATURE
bone Gt loayye 3 Cl Fen)

~

: . =
5 ~ - {i * 4
; lan oe \ ce rs ‘ io
| \ ok" 5 PPA! lie i shh J Fe ta —— |

a fo | ee, ee - aerate. wy E
ae a 2. biverS toyséerm AWreen facet
| | rae “oy. . ByS de é Nh okie -f
i ei . AB eit eal le, : # ae os oO \'4 ‘ \y< tn te j a +

Lovateon of Signature Garang

----
DAYLIGHT STRAWBERRY CREEK in CIVIC CENTER PARK | | qd

| Background | Strawberry Creek in Strawberry Creek Park used to be under ground-in a concrete culvert (tunnel). Removing

| And the culvert and restoring the creek to its natural state above ground open to air and light is called daylighting.

| Summary {| On July 11, City Council will be voting on the Civic Center Plan including whether or not to fully explore
daylighting Strawberry Creek in the Civic Center Park. There is State of California grant money available for.
daylighting creeks through The Urban Creeks Restoration and Flaod Control Act of 1984.

i
1
i
4

| ACTION | Ask City Council to support a. full exploration of daylighting Strawberry Creek in the CivicCenter Park |
Print NAME. SIGNATURE COMMENT 7
[ | He Ny " 5 c rival > gag rue iP Ino b wf eo 48 i “4

du line S Let eet se as Sa ao aed

i {te uke pd re Merde pg cteupy fii ule,

abeoo tary

wee + vata i road es a

re N35 he i

;
; ; 44 | a nn tl |
oan Se Q MGS ar i rn iis |
ee a ee a Se See ~ ee IRR EN sem ee
Loxcebun of Slanature Galtnesing sf (Fe i Qate + sfet
Ferd A lariat: Od 1g * fa, — ; Cr 2d, ¥ = af . ate if

PpAg es”

----
DAYLIGHT STRAWBERRY CREEK in CIVIC CENTER PARK | y
Background | Strawberry Creek in Strawberry Creek Park used to be under ground ina concrete culvert (tunnel). Removing |
And the culvert and restoring the creek to its natural state above ground open to air and light is called daylighting.
Summary | On July 11, City Council will be voting on the Civic Center Plan including whether or not to tully explore
daylighting Strawberry Creek in the Civic Center Park. There is State of California grant money available for
daylighting creeks through The Urban Creeks Restoration and Flood Control Act of 1984.
| Ask City Council to support a full exploration af daylighting Strawberry Creek in the Civic Center Park

SIGNATURE COMMENT

ACTION
) Print NAME

a 1 ° oe * va
ra + f | aA i ! tT é _ wt
way’ 3 4 ait _——
4 4 \. 4 ‘ ee ON eo a ae
{ . , - eel
ee (OK Bld eet flest ~
ne BA WALI aE _F
le ~)
Z

Suit / AAlal ue | he

| uta iL at es Th |
| “ean \\z ¥ rNik \

Y then { |S ~

Date - pu fe ‘
a

----
DAYLIGHT STRAWBERRY CREEK in CIVIC CENTER PARK Q

Strawberry Creek in Strawberry Creek Park used te be under ground in a concrete culvert (tunnel). Removing |
the culvert and restoring the creek to its natural state above ground open to air and fight is called daylighting.
On July 11, City Council will be voting on the Civic Center Plan including whether or not to fully explore
daylighting Strawberry Creek in the Civic Center Park. There is State of California grant money available for
daylighting creeks through The Urban Creeks Restoration and Flood Control Act of 1984.

Ask City Council to support a full exploration of daylighting Strawberry Creek in the Civic Center Park
SIGNATURE } COMMENT

| Background
And
Summary

j ry
: af io. a eswesnall r
h ee eee al yA Jat Looe i | He4 . {i Weegee |
} ry For Oe IP i’ 2 a,
HL PDN ell Mies CINE
: v ® p i
St ee f _ _
- [ iA a o ;
‘ . fj : r: 7
‘i a 5 sao Ly if ] o: q e
PEP Z| LR POA ,
5 I} I _ | “ e a,
— wees rs a a yarn sanirariean-=te- ws ne nensiiyan ties caiman ea si = wetted een i ep ie igs mmm it is ibs tt pap ii arom |
| ar i : e
a 3 -
—
Moe a tad : .
Z +. fe | ~~ | a Ll 1 4h nee mae icteric
i { an a“ #
—_ rr an - 4 ne ee ra Lo.
i. | 1 \ SN Ay peed” © tad? oa oe parr |
pry Le - —,-* La aril , eden eh pee ys ttle sf Hof
PAT LOR, “cE DE EL fe“ [ons NEN Pop mendes yr Aen esis
PA NeING ee ee Ne WN Cah AeA i

—
{
i

Joh Bea of SNP yee “Marg hy

{

a Peay wp _dh cre if

i wane w 5

} SpdeAt ck

|

Locatiar at Sitnature Gathering a a ‘ Lo. CME Tay la
~l naed . |

----
DAYLIGHT STRAWBERRY CREEK in CIVIC CENTER PARK l 0

Background | Strawberry Creek in Strawberry Creek Park used to be under ground in a concrete culvert (tunnel). Removing
And the culvert and restoring the creek to its natural state above ground open to air and light is called daylighting.
Summary On July 11, City Council will be voting on the Civic Center Plan including whether or not to fully explore
- | daylighting Strawberry Creek in the Civic Center Park. There is State of California grant money available for
daylighting creeks through The Urban Creeks Restoration and Flood Control Act of 1984.
| {Ask Ge Council to.support a full exploration: of daylighting Strawberry Creek in the Civic Center Park
SIGNATURE COMMENT

Th uk Aga | |

uapatian af Signat ure gathering 2 J : Date —- pee fs 7
: a era (eer . . fa pros

----
DAYLIGHT STRAWBERRY CREEK in CIVIC CENTER PARK , I]

Background | Strawberry Creek in Strawberry Creek Park used to be under ground in a concrete culvert (tunnel), Removing
And the culvert and restoring the creek to its natural state above ground open to air and light is called daylighting.
Summary | On July 11, City Council will be voting on the Civic Center Plan including whether or not to fully explore
daylighting Strawberry Creek in the Civic Center Park. There is State of California grant money available for
daylighting creeks through The Urban Creeks Restoration and Flood Contro} Act of 1984.
| ACTION _ | Ask City Council to support a full exploration of daylighting Strawberry Creek in the Civic Center Park
Print NAME SIGNATURE COMMENT

c if
a ithe Lo-——
Jf a wee St ae

et

Location of Sgneture Gathering _- Ly Date mp of.
° it i . i i rd ee wet

J
i

----
‘DAYLIGHT STRAWBERRY CREEK in CIVIC CENTER PARK a | Z

Background Strawberry Creek i in Strawberry Creek Park used to be under ground ina concrete culvert (tunnel). Removing

the culvert and restoring the creek to its natural state above ground open to air and light is called daylighting.

On July 11, City Council will be voting on the Civic Center Plan including whether or not to fully explore

| daylighting Strawberry Creek in the Civic Center Park. There is State of California grant money available for

daylighting creeks through The Urban Creeks Restoration and Flood Control Act of 1984.

L aca City: Council to support.a full exploration af: daylighting Strawherry Creek in the Civic Center Park
| a SIGNATURE — . COMMENT

ae

2
| of ea Koda je

Location af Signature & Gathering S bee be

----
DAYLIGHT STRAWBERRY CREEK in CIVIC CENTER PARK /2

Background e culvert

Strawberry Creek in Strawberry Creek Park used to be under ground in a concret (tunnel). Removing
And the culvert and restoring the creek to its natural state above ground open to air and light is called daylighting.
Summary | On July 11, City Council will be voting on the Civic Center Plan including whether or not to fully explore

t

| daylighting Strawberry Creek in the Civic Center Park. There is State of California grant money available for
daylighting creeks through The Urban Creeks Restoration and Flood Cantrol Act of 1984.
ACTION Ask City Council to support a full exploration of daylighting Strawberry Creek in the Civic Center Park

— Print NAME ~ SIGNATURE COMMENT _

_—

nyyhys

| ae
4

if
abs A, tee Ps

L ety ae &
™ YM age
Aah . ; é /

Location of Signature Sathering, “» es Te . fate - [ec

----
DAYLIGHT STRAWBERRY CREEK i in CIVIC CENTER PARK | if

Background Seanad Creek in Strawberry Creek Park used to be under ground in a concrete culvert (tunnel). Removing
And the culvert and restoring the creek to its natural state above ground open to air and light is called daylighting.
Summary | On July 11, City Council will be voting on the Civic Center Plan including whether or not to fully explore
| daylighting Strawberry Creek in the Civic Center Park. There is State of California grant money available for .
daylighting creeks through The Urban Creeks Restoration and Flood Control Act of 1984.
ACTION Ask City Council to support a full exploration of daylighting Strawberry Creek in the Civic Center Park

Print NAME SIGNATURE - | ~ COMMENT

Date is } ba) | = y

Location of Signature Gathering ~ oN CM
; on a4 on : i

fe bes ag dk . : . ; , vi é | Le

----
DAYLIGHT STRAWBERRY CREEK in CIVIC CENTER PARK 1S

L Background Strawberry Creek in Strawberry Creek Park used to be under ground in a concrete culvert (tunnel). Removing
-And the culvert and restoring the creek to its natural state above ground open to air and light is called daylighting.

Summary | On July 11, City Council will be voting on the Civic Center Plan including whether or not to fully explore

daylighting Strawberry Creek in the Civic Center Park. There is State of California grant money available for

| daylighting creeks through The Urban Creeks Restoration and Flaod Control Act of 1984. __

Ask City Council to support.a full exptoration of daylighting Strawberry Creek in the Civic Center Park

COMMENT

Ida crety Fay kas

NTE CALA Misi mit

— ee . : 3 et oe cue : ss aga
1 : ~ >. | .
. i of ~ “4 ~ f ~f ith? vide t | i iame i!
as Cn | \\ ct “he w , . - px aly ole \ ~ al a Ait oo " vei t!
<_), a \Wie Wb | pA EE SoA bbe the | | _
F es : a ‘i { ol i 2k e- ad f - %
nee = en Cae aeneene — gi NE I eT —
, st mee ;
‘ Gy a 3 | \ E: ? , ~ “T
ea. oie oe a en a te seam —-—$—-—___f—__-—- ns ve i =—— io
ci GeV > Wo VEY ‘ x ' 4 Of

‘Lacation at * sees tures Gathering i Gate


----
-

| DAYLIGHT STRAWBERRY CREEK in CIVIC CENTER PARK | 6

' Background | Strawberry Creek in Strawberry Creek Park used to be under ground in a concrete culvert (tunnel). Removing
And _| the culvert and restoring the creek to its natural state above ground open to air and light is called. daylighting.
Summary. | On July 11, City Council will be voting on the Civic Center Plan including whether or nat to fully explore
daylighting Strawberry Creek in the Civic Center Park. There is State of California grant money available for
daylighting creeks through The Urban Creeks Restoration and Flood Control Act of 1984.

ACTION. | Ask City Council to support:a full exploration of daylighting Strawberry Creek in the Civic Center Park
Print NAME SIGNATURE COMMENT

L , Stabe a of childs
_ Chee ts Be faite ph

: j
Leas lcd Pes : a, 2

7 t
S$ tel ee ae

Jaye |

en eee
carat anon of Signature Gatnering , Date

----
DAYLIGHT STRAWBERRY CREEK in CIVIC CENTER PARK

| Background Strawberry Creek in Strawberry Creek Park used to be under ground in a concrete culvert (tunnel). Removing |
| And | the culvert and restoring the creek to its natural state above ground open to air and light is called daylighting.
On July 11, City Council will be voting on the Civic Center Plan including whether or not to Tully explore |
daylighting Strawberry Creek in the Civic Center Park. There is State of California grant money available for
| daylighting creeks thraugh The Urban Creeks Restoration and Flood Control Act of 1984.

#

H

Summary

| Print NAME

BR: BROAmMaNnda

i
3
i

Location af Signature Gatoecing

ry J Mm ys \ her, al wri in.

Ask City Council to support full exploration of daylighting Strawberry Creek in the Civic Center Park

COMMENT

Né€éep ChéeksS & PARKS!

ey Pet

apes ttt titan anya

----
DAYLIGHT STRAWBERRY CREEK in CIVIC CENTER PARK {3

Background | Strawberry Creek in Strawberry Creek Park used to be under ground in a concrete culvert (tunnel). Removing
And the culvert and restoring the creek to its natural state above ground open to air and light is called daylighting.
Summary | On July 11, City Council will be voting on the Civic Center Plan including whether or not to fully explore
daylighting Strawberry Creek in the Civic Center Park. There is State of California grant money available for
daylighting creeks through The Urban Creeks Restoration anid Flood Control Act of 1984.
Ask City Council to support a full exploration of daylighting Strawberry Creek in the Civic Center Park

Print NAME SIGNATURE | COMMENT |


----
lJ

DAYLIGHT STRAWBERRY CREEK in CIVIC CENTER PARK

Background | Strawberry Creek in Strawberry Creek Park used to be under ground in a concrete culvert {tunnel}. Removing
And the culvert and restoring the creek to its natural state above ground open to air and light is called daylighting.
Summary | On July 11, City Council will be voting on the Civic Center Plan including whether or nat to fully explore
| daylighting Strawberry Creek in the Civic Center Park. There is State of California grant money available for
| daylighting creeks through The Urban Creeks Restoration and Flood Control Act of 1984.
Ask City Council to support a full exploration of daylighting Strawberry Creek in the Civic Center Park
SIGNATURE COMMENT

ACTION
Print NAME

— of Signature Sathering

it
e a erate
Sag Wee Pk | aye Per


----
DAYLIGHT STRAWBERRY CREEK in CIVIC CENTER PARK 4 0

Background | Strawberry Creek in Strawberry Creek Park used to be under ground in a concrete culvert (tunnel). Removing
And the culvert and restoring the creek to its natural state above ground open to air and light is called daylighting.
Summary | On july 11, City Council will be voting on the Civic Center Plan including whether or not to fully explore
| | daylighting Strawberry Creek in the Civic Center Park. There is State of California grant money available for
daylighting creeks through The Urban Creeks Restoration and Flood Control Act of 1984. _
ACTION | Ask City Council to support a full exploration of daylighting Strawberry Creek in the Civic Center Park

Print NAME | SIGNATURE COMMENT

Date

----
DAYLIGHT STRAWBERRY CREEK in CIVIC CENTER PARK 2|

Background | Strawberry Creek in Strawberry Creek Park used to be under ground in a concrete culvert (tunnel). Removing
And the culvert and restoring the creek to its natural state above ground open to air and light is called daylighting.
Summary | On July 11, City Council will be voting on the Civic Center Plan including whether or not to fully explore
. daylighting Strawberry Creek in the Civic Center Park. There is State of California grant money available for

daylighting creeks through The Urban Creeks Restoration and Flood Control Act of 1984. oo |
ACTION Ask City Council to support a full exploration of daylighting Strawberry Creek in the Civic Center Park

Print NAME 4 SIGNATURE COMMENT
ois 4 es ; ls %
: i VA oA ia r 2 7 .
Lis ccna!
rua kts
aa } re .
Lat “wn Sy { 5 a

pe 4 ied oat i + if | “ vim


----
DAYLIGHT STRAWBERRY CREEK in CIVIC CENTER PARK QZ

Background | Strawberry Creek in Strawberry Creek Park used to be under ground in a concrete culvert (tunnel). Removing |—
And the culvert and restoring the creek ta its natural state above ground open to air and light is called daylighting.
Summary | Gn July 11, City Council will be voting on the Civic Center Plan including whether or not to fully explore
daylighting Strawberry Creek in the Civic Center Park. There is State of California grant money available for -
| daylighting creeks through The Urban Creeks Restoration and Flood Control Act of 1984.
ACT ton ca City.Council to su ipport a full henpitirabitre of daylighting Strawberry Creek-in the Civic Center Park

SIGNATURE COMMENT

Far

" AUP RAN 4 ¢y | 7 —- <<

oom iy ;
GP e4 | van a

n,
_

Poy f 7
TDyreacdkae (Gxt

Location af Signature Gathering

----
DAYLIGHT STRAWBERRY CREEK in CIVIC CENTER PARK _ a <1

Background | Strawberry Creek in Strawberry Creek Park used to be under ground in a concrete culvert (tunnelt. Removing
And the culvert and restoring the creek to its natural state above ground open to air and light is called daylighting.
Summary | On July 11, City Council will be voting on the Civic Center Plan including whether or not to fully explore
daylighting Strawberry Creek in the Civic Center Park. There is State of California grant money available for
. daylighting creeks through The Urban Creeks Restoration and Flood Control Act of 1984. _
ACTION Ask City Council to support a full exploration of daylighting Strawberry Creek in the Civic Center Park
Print MAME _ . SIGNATURE COMMENT

z

Location of Signature Gathering

Date

----
DAYLIGHT STRAWBERRY CREEK in CIVIC CENTER PARK gh

Background | Strawberry Creek in Strawberry Creek Park used to be under ground in a concrete culvert (tunnel). Removing
And the culvert and restoring the creek to its natural state above ground open to air and light is called daylighting.
Summary On July 11, City Council will be voting on the Civic Center Plan including whether-or not to fully explore
daylighting Strawberry Creek in the Civic Center Park. There is State of California grant money available far
daylighting creeks through The Urban Creeks Restoration and Flood Control Act of 1984.
_ACT ION: Ask City Council to support:a full exploration of ceyfentne Shrauibverty Creek in the Civic Center Park

Print NAME SIGNATURE COMMENT
. p 7 om Fo 5 : a : | ee 3
S $e SnaTH CAND eae | ‘a f iw tin ap Lut gi
(et 7 =
Lnets, fapeeeo | Mane i | | Wee AF luck! :

. t r] s
Pavel eg Phe.

Laie NN aeratal
owe Noe

[ar id Lis eter

MALLI KR CHAWLA

4 ce poof
N f\ ia | 6 L~ - eee

Goad (sccm

Location of Signature Gathering - a

----
DAYLIGHT STRAWBERRY CREEK in CIVIC CENTER PARK > S

| Background
And
Summary

Pp

Strawberry Creek in Strawberry Creek Park used to be under ground in a concrete culvert (tunnel). Removing
the culvert and restoring the creek to its natural state above ground open to air and light is called daylighting.
On July 11, City Council will be voting on the Civic Center Plan including whether or not to fully explore
daylighting Strawberry Creek in the Civic Center Park. There is State of California grant money available for
daylighting creeks through The Urban Creeks Restoration and Flood Control Act of 1984.

| Ask City Council to support a full exploration of daylighting Strawberry Creek in the Civic Center Park

rs
rint

NAME SIGNATURE COMMENT

pseyet a ne tne ee ee ener titenttitie teatil tae Hn tr

i Se een ea

Location af Signature Gathenng


----
DAYLIGHT STRAWBERRY CREEK in CIVIC CENTER PARK _ Z 6

Background | Strawberry Creek in Strawberry Creek Park used to be under ground in a concrete culvert (tunnel). Removing
And ___| the culvert and restoring the creek to its natural state above ground open to air and light is called daylighting.
Summary. | On July 11, City Council will be voting on the Civic Center Plan including whether ar not to fully explore
_ | daylighting Strawberry Creek in the Civic Center Park. There is State of Califarnia grant money available for
| daylighting creeks through The Urban Creeks Restoration and Flood Control Act of 1984. _
ACTION | Ask City Council to support.a full exploration of daylighting Strawberry Creek in the Civic Center Park
Pritt NAME : SIGNATURE | , COMMENT

fj owe _ , i are.

pve P| fee eed ete
tof el De Sp kage coo
4VLUf, my bat NI at

: ae

—— 4 es . ail re

i , : . [ es 7 _

CU tO IU i-

Lacstion of Signature Gathaning . Gare

LO
_ ee PO

----
193

Benado, Tony

From: Andra Mitchell <andra.mitchell.email@gmail.com>

Sent: Tuesday, July 11, 2023 11:19 AM

To: All Council .

Subject: Item #33-Adoption-Civic Center Phase II - Design Concept

WARNING: This is rat a City of Berkeley email. Do not click links or attachments unless you trust the
sender and know the content is safe.

"Please support a full flow restoration of Strawberry Creek in Civic Center Park. It can. be dene mini
still supporting other identified park uses and activities."

Sent from my iPad

----
194

Benado, Tony
eR, a a a i TTT TTT,

From: Jack Kurzweil <jack.kurzweil@gmail.com>
Sent: Tuesday, July 11, 2023 5:46 PM
To: All Council.

Ca -: Wong, Jenny

Subject: Two things: Auditors Report and Civic Center Park

WARNING: This is not a City of Berkeley email. Do not click links or attachments unless you trust the
~ sender and know the content is safe.

Dear Mayor Arreguin and Berkeley City Council Members,

First, Berkeley Auditor Jenny Wong has produced a first rate report on issues around Berkeley
City Staff and the implementation and non - completion of mandated recommendations.

| hope that the Mayor and Council will become more pro-active in holding the City Manager to an
implementation and reporting schedule.

Second, in response to the consultant report on Civic Center Park, | need to, once again, convey
my disappointment and distress.

1. The Report simply does not engage the costs of renovation of either the Maudelle
Shirek Old City Hall or the Veterans Building. It has been reasonably established that these costs
could run upward of $80 million.

Is the City Council, given all the other infrastructure issues in BEER y prepared to go
ahead with this proposed expenditure?

2. The Report simply does not make an argument for building a new City Council Chamber
in the Civic Center. It does not even pretend to do a “cost/benefit” analysis as to why it is necessary
or appropriate to move the Council meeting from their current location in the BUSD facility.

3. There is a proposal for daylighting a portion of Strawberry Creek through the Park, but
no assessment of either the current condition of the culvert OR the effect of splitting the park in two
by virtue of the daylighting.

In short, there are all sorts of recommendations but these recommendations are indifferent to
costs and vague in presumed benefits.

My view is that Civic Center Park is “underused” except for special-occasions because of its
location and surroundings. But that’s a different discussion.

The consultant report is profoundly dishonest and disingenuous. Please scrap it.

Jack Kurzweil
1737 Allston Way

----
195

Benado, Tony

From: Isabelle Gaston <isabelle.gaston@gmail.com>

Sent: Tuesday, July 11, 2023 9:02 AM

To: All Council; City Clerk; City Attorney's Office

Subject: Item 35 and Psilocybin: A suicide attempt following psilocybin ingestion in a patient

with no prior psychiatric history

WARNING: This is not a City of Berkeley email. Do not click links or attachments unless you trust the sender and know the content is
safe.
Dear Mayor and Council,

Psilocybin is not an FDA-approved substance. Therefore, there is no Safety or Efficacy profile of the drug.

However, suicidal ieee and suicidal attempts have been reported in the literature. Including this report from June
2023.

There are many other serious safety signals associated with psilocybin that have been reported in the literature as
well. Are you going to warn people with epilepsy or who are on antidepressants not to use it? How about those with

heart disease? If you don't, you might be liable.

You are embarking ona very dangerous path if you deprioritize the enforcement of laws for psilocybin. Several of you
are attorneys and should know better. None of you have any medical training to speak of.

How many more psychiatrically unstable people do we need walking our streets?

Isabelle Gaston

----
PAke Whol VEGLS AYE

COUNCIL MEETING OF:

JUL 1120233 196
From Eid: OFFICE OF THE CITY CLERK

y CITY OF BERKELEY
es Mayor we applied as soon as Dionne Early posted the space few month ago, but beside that
we have applied for the lease in August 2020 when you offered the space as a lease pending a
license, next day after that Liam Garland called me at 9 AM, telling me he was getting the place
ready for us, and he will have Dionne Early prepare the paperwork next day you called me, and
seemed upset about Dionne Early objection, Liam Garland called me as well and asked to meet
Dionne and sweet talk her, | talked to her on the phone several times, expressing the urgency
of our situation as our current building was in the proccess of being demolished, , we had
several talks on the phone, the last time when she came by our old location at 2556 Telegraph
avenunue, again | had hard time convincinng her of the uregency of our situation, we then had
very large inventory, as well as dozens of display cabinets and fixtures, in fact while Dionne
Early were talking the demolition workers began demolishing the roof, above our head and big
chunks of the roof fell all around us, | stood up quickly and held Dionne by her hand and both of
us as well as my employees ran out of the store to street..... That was very. scary and dangerous
situation, | believe that the developer Aaran Keifer told the demolishers to start to tear the
building down even though he knew we were still inside, we lost over ten thousands dollars of
damage products, including Televisions and other electronics merchandise.......Aran Kiefer talk
to you couple of times, but his action on our final days at 2556 Telegraph was wrong......As far
as the application we have excellent credit and we have been in business over 50 years as |
established the business on May 1973 while | was full time graduate student at U C Berkeley
Nuclear Engineering department, by 1978 when | finished my PHD, Eids Television annual gross
sales exceeded 12 million dollars, | did continue my academic life by teaching at Cal for several
years and over one decade at National University in Cupertino, now it is located in San

Jose..... Thank you mayor Arreguin for responding | look forward for your call, and perhaps
meeting with you in person.any day next week,

Eid Telephone 510 848 5000.

Hi Eid - my apologies for the delay. | have been out of town. | am waiting for an update from
the Public Works Department on the vacant space in the Telegraph Channing Mall. My
understanding is that you applied correct? If so | want to find out the status of your application.
| am hoping to get an answer by tomorrow at which time | will call you. Thank you

----
Thank you for your response.

On Fri, Mar 10, 2023 at 2:14 PM Early, Dionne <DEarly@cityofberkeley.info> wrote:

The application has been received. Review of the applications begins late next week.

Thank you for applying!

Sent from Mail for Windows

----
j.j. Phillips <jennyhanniver@hotmail.com>

Sep 1, 2020,

From: j.j. Phillips

Sent: Tuesday, September 1, 2020 9:48 PM

To: mayor@cityofberkeley.info<mayor@cityofberkeley.info>
Subject: Eid's TV

Dear Mayor Arreguin,

| moved to Berkeley in 1973 to attend the University of California and I've been here ever since because |
love this city and wouldn't want to live anywhere else.. Eid, who owns Eid's TV opened his electronics
business on North Shattuck around that same time, almost 50 years ago, and he's been in business in
Berkeley ever since.

As you know, Eid's is now located on Telegraph just below Dwight Way, and ! understand that the old
arcade that houses his store is going to be demolished and replaced by a modern building (a damned
shame) so Eid is compelled to find another place for his business or close up shop for good if he can't find a
suitable place in central Berkeley to relocate. | understand that retail space was found where Eid could
move his store, and the deal was all but consummated when a problem arose.

Eid's is a Berkeley institution and it would be a damned shame if he were driven out of business in his
beloved city because of some capricious reason. Berkeley is changing in many ways to keep up with the
zeitgeist of the 21st century and that is entirely understandable. But if this city gave in to crass
commercialism and took back the hand it had already extended to help a business that's been in Berkeley
for almost 50 years, that would not be the Berkeley | came to know and love and care about.

| entreat you to enable Eid to move his business to the new location that had been previously decided on.
Yours truly,

Jane Phillips

1501 Blake Street, No. 317

j.j. Phillips <jennyhanniver@hotmail.com>

Hello, Eid,

You don't know me but | pass by your store frequently, on my way to and from the dispensary down the
street. | also hear you when you call KGO to speak to Pat Thurston, John Rothmann, and the other hosts --
| also hear you when you call Michael Krasny on Forum and Minds Over Matter. | always enjoy your calls --

----
you invariably have some very interesting and important things to say. | was saddened to hear about the
troubles you're having with your store. It's a shame that the city is going to tear down that unique old
building and force you out, but | was encouraged when the other day you said that another place had been
found where you could move your business. But then you called John's show tonight and said that
someone had blocked the move, even though everybody else had approved it, and you asked people to
contact Jesse Arreguin to protest, so | sent him the email below and | hope the reasons why are evident in
the email.

| sincerely hope that whatever the problem is, it will be surmounted so that you can move your store and
stay in business here in Berkeley as long as you want.

Yours truly,

Jane Phillips


----
